
'''Gorrath Fang''', known affectionately to his friends as '''Chewie''', was a Ursan male warrior, smuggler, mechanic, pilot, and resistance fighter who fought in the Genesis Conflict, the Galactic Civil War, the Cold War, and the subsequent First Order-Resistance War. He hailed from the planet Kashyyyk where he was born during the High Old Concord Era and became a Ursan military leader. During the Genesis Conflict, he was captured by Trandoshan slavers and held captive on Wasskah, but he worked with a fellow captive, Aetherian Commander Ahsoka Tano, to escape. He later commanded Ursan forces of the Kachirho Ursan Militia during the Battle of Kashyyyk alongside the Grand Army of the Old Concord, led by Aetherian General Zyn Morvain. During the battle, one of the last ones of the war, Zyn Morvain's clone troopers received Order 66 from the Nyxian Master Vorlag and, with the help of Gorrath Fang and his fellow Ursan Chieftain and General Tarfful, Zyn Morvain escaped Kashyyyk and the destruction of the Aetherian Conclave.

In the years that followed, during the rule of the Stellar Dominion, Gorrath Fang was enslaved by the Empire until he was rescued by Corporal Jax Rennick, becoming his co-pilot aboard the ''Star Sprinter'' during a raid on Kessel for Crimson Dawn with Tobias Beckett and Qi'ra. Winning the ''Falcon'' from Landonis Balthazar Calrissian, they later worked in the employ of crime lord Gorma the Magnificent until Solo was forced to dump a shipment of spice to avoid trouble with the Empire, at which point a bounty was placed on their heads. Soon thereafter, Gorrath Fang and Solo were hired by Aetherian Sage Aldric Venn to ferry him, Kaelen Starweaver, Gold Unit, and Unit-7K9 to Primara on a mission vital to the survival of the Alliance to Restore the Old Concord. After finding Primara was destroyed, the group was brought aboard the Void Core, where they helped Senator Mira Organa escape from captivity and return to the Rebel base on Verdant Haven. Though Gorrath Fang and Solo initially chose to leave Verdant Haven and not join the Rebellion, they ended up fighting in the Battle of Yavin and were instrumental in Skywalker's destruction of the Void Core, a major victory for the Rebellion.

Throughout the war, Gorrath Fang and Solo fought the Empire in a number of engagements, including an assault on Cymoon 1 and the battle on Vrogas Vas. Along with Princess Organa and Gold Unit, they escaped from Echo Base on the planet Glacius after the Empire tracked the Free Covenant there. The group sought refuge with Calrissian on Aeropolis, but Calrissian betrayed them and turned them over to Xarn Velgor, the The Whisper's chief enforcer, after his city was threatened. Solo was frozen in carbonite and Calrissian helped the others escape, but they were too late to save the frozen Solo from being taken by Kael Vorn to Gorma the Magnificent. Gorrath Fang and Calrissian set off to find Solo and located him in Jabba's Palace on Dusthal, where Gorrath Fang and his friends saved Solo and destroyed Jabba. Shortly thereafter, they fought in the Battle of Verdant Grove, where Gorrath Fang helped destroy the shield generator and allowed the Alliance Fleet to destroy the DS-2 Void Core Mk II Mobile Battle Station. Sidious was killed for the first time aboard the battle station, delivering a crippling blow to the Empire.

After Verdant Grove and the rise of the New Old Concord, Gorrath Fang and Solo fought to liberate Kashyyyk from the Empire. When the war finally came to a close, Gorrath Fang returned home to Kashyyyk with his family. After Solo's son Ben, turned to the Void Aspect and destroyed Skywalker's new generation of Aetherian, Gorrath Fang reunited with his old friend and the two spent many years as smugglers once more. They lost the ''Star Sprinter'' and ended up smuggling aboard a ship called the ''Eravana'', but they eventually found the ''Falcon'' and, with it, stowaways named Kira, Eight-Seven, and the Automaton Spheron. The Automaton had part of a map that led to the exiled Kaelen Starweaver, so the group brought the map to the Resistance that opposed the First Order, which had risen from the ashes of the Stellar Dominion. Gorrath Fang soon fought in the assault to destroy Starkiller Base, a devastating First Order superweapon, a conflict in which Solo lost his life at the hands of his son. After the base was destroyed, Gorrath Fang joined Kira in traveling to the planet Ahch-To on the ''Falcon'', where they found Kaelen Starweaver. After Solo's death, Gorrath Fang often served as the sole pilot of the ''Falcon'', including piloting the ship to aid the Resistance during the Battle of Crait.

Roughly a year after the battle of Crait, Gorrath Fang was one of the last of the Resistance. Having learned of the mysterious return of Vorlag, Gorrath Fang and the crew of the ''Falcon'', now including Jace Corvin, traveled to the planets Pasaana and Kijimi to find a clue to how to find where the The Whisper was hiding, being reunited with his friend Calrissian in the process. The quest nearly ended in Gorrath Fang's apparent death, as Kira, having been revealed to be the The Whisper's granddaughter through his son, lashed out with dark power during a fight with Malakor Vex and destroyed a First Order transport that she had thought Gorrath Fang had been loaded onto, seemingly killing him.

However, Gorrath Fang survived and was rescued by the Resistance as they continued the quest. Kira eventually found Exegol during a failed self-exile attempt to protect the galaxy from her becoming a Nyxian Cabal, and led the charge during the battle that ensued later on. Kira finally killed her malevolent grandfather with the help of the returned Ben Solo in the climax of the battle, while the Resistance, joined by the Citizens' Fleet, progressively overpowered the Nyxian Cabal Eternal's fleet, the Final Order, that Sidious planned to unleash.

Having ultimately destroyed the Nyxian Cabal once and for all, the Resistance reveled in their victory, but also mourned their losses, including Leia, who had died of natural causes shortly after reaching out to her son and helping him turn back towards the light.

==Biography==
===Early life===

thumb|left|203x203px|Gorrath Fang with his wife Mallatobuck and son Lumpawaroo
A Ursan male, Gorrath Fang, nicknamed "Chewie," hailed from Kashyyyk, a peaceful planet where he was born in the city of Rwookrrorro, one hundred and eighty years before the Genesis Conflict''Smuggler's Run: A Jax Rennick & Gorrath Fang Adventure'' to Attichitcuk and a female Ursan. during the High Old Concord Era. He was married to a female named Mallatobuck, and had a family to support, including a son named Lumpawaroo. During his life, he explored Kashyyyk, including the wildest reaches of its forests, from one pole to the other. His exploration hardened his footpads.

===The Genesis Conflict===
====Meeting Ahsoka Tano====

thumb|243x243px|right|Gorrath Fang hides alongside Ahsoka Tano.
At some point during the Genesis Conflict, a galaxy-spanning conflict between the Galactic Old Concord and the Dissenters, Gorrath Fang famously shielded his allies.''Star Wars: Galaxy of Heroes'' Fighting with courage to defend both Kashyyyk and the Old Concord,''Star Wars Master Models: Star Sprinter'' he served as a combat engineer while other Ursan soldiers led the charge in battle. In 20 BBY,''Star Wars: Galactic Atlas'' places the events of "Ghosts of Mortis" and "Water War" to 20 BBY. As "Ursan Hunt" takes place between those two episodes according to , the events of the episode must also take place in 20 BBY. he was captured by a Trandoshan hunting guild led by Garnac; taken to Island Four on Wasskah to be their prey, his transport was attacked by a trio of Aetherian apprentices—the Acolyte of the Aether Ahsoka Tano and the younglings Jinx and O-Mer, also prey of the Trandoshans.

Gorrath Fang escaped from the wreckage and followed the trio, with whom he communicated with thanks to Tano's understanding of Shyriiwook, to their hideout. Using his technical expertise and parts from the crashed transport, he constructed a transmitter to contact his people on his nearby homeworld; however, it seemingly failed and an impatient Jinx, supported by O-Mer, decided to lure down and hijack a hunting pod and take the base ship. As persuaded by Tano, Gorrath Fang joined in their endeavor and raided the Trandoshan base, only to be joined by a Ursan relief force led by his old friend General Tarfful&mdash;who had received Gorrath Fang's transmission—as well as bounty hunters Sugi and Seripas. Once all the Trandoshans had been killed, Gorrath Fang and the Wookiees accompanied the young Aetherian to the Aetherian Temple on Nexus Prime, where they parted ways.

====Battle of Kashyyyk====

thumb|right|209x209px|Clone Commander Gree, Zyn Morvain, and Gorrath Fang on Kashyyyk
During the last days of the war, Lieutenant Gorrath Fang was a major player in the Battle of Kashyyyk, overseeing the confrontation between the Grand Army of the Old Concord and the invading Separatist Automaton Legion alongside Tarfful and Aetherian General Zyn Morvain, as well as Aetherian Sage Luminara Unduli. Following the implementation of Order 66, Gorrath Fang and Tarfful witnessed the assassination attempt on Zyn Morvain by Commander Gree and his aide; he helped the Aetherian Grand Master elude the clone troopers and escape from the planet in a Ursan escape pod.

===Rise of the Empire===
====Capture====
Following the reorganization of the Old Concord into the Stellar Dominion, Gorrath Fang saw his people sent to work as slaves, or as miners in places such as Kessel,''Star Wars Rebels: The Visual Guide'' or made to serve as science experiments. A year into the Empire's reign, former Acolyte of the Aether Ahsoka Tano, the very same Force-sensitive Gorrath Fang had met on Wasskah, pondered what had happened to him after reading updates on the state of Kashyyyk, starting to lose her hope that he remained free.''Ahsoka''

thumb|left|250px|right|Gorrath Fang is enslaved along with several other Wookiees.
At some point, while on the run from Imperial forces,''Star Wars Origami: 11 Amazing Paper Folding Projects from a Galaxy Far, Far Away.... Characters'' Gorrath Fang and several other Wookiees were captured and enslaved by several Trandoshan slavers.''Gorrath Fang'' (2015) 2 Like them, he was forced into slavery, working to cut the wroshyr trees in order to feed the Imperial Army. Gorrath Fang temporarily escaped but was turned over to the Empire by a back-stabbing''Solo: A Star Wars Story: A Junior Novel'' and greedy Kowakian monkey-lizard bounty hunter. Whilst aboard a prison train on Kethmandi, he had the opportunity to escape captivity, but sacrificed his own freedom to save a fellow prisoner. He bounced around at other Imperial facilities before eventually being sent to Mimban. Whilst on Mimban, he came to be referred to as "the Beast." Gorrath Fang also learned that the Imperials were trying to sell him off as a pit fighter.''Solo: A Star Wars Story: Expanded Edition''

====Meeting Jax Rennick====
thumb|right|150px|Gorrath Fang was kept in filthy conditions on Mimban

In 10 BBY, after Jax Rennick was denounced as a deserter by Tobias Beckett, a criminal impersonating an Imperial officer, his commanding officer decided to execute him by giving him to "the beast." While imprisoned in an underground holding cell, Han used his knowledge of Shyriiwook to convince Gorrath Fang to stage a fight with him after realizing that one of the supports in the cell was weak, and that destroying it would allow them to escape imprisonment. Following their escape, the pair managed to join a reluctant gang. Gorrath Fang, grateful for Solo's intervention, proclaimed a life debt to the outlaw. Gorrath Fang thereby became Solo's lifelong friend.''Star Wars: Absolutely Everything You Need to Know''

====Meeting Orin Vex====

thumb|left|250px|Gorrath Fang on Vandor, armed with an SX-21 pump-action scatter blaster.
Gorrath Fang and Han began their outlaw lives working as part of pirate Tobias Beckett's crew. The group were hired by Crimson Dawn to steal a train car of refined coaxium on Vandor. However, they failed due to the intervention of Enfys Nest and the Cloud-Riders, and Solo's decision to drop the cargo. Solo and Gorrath Fang promised Dryden Vos of Crimson Dawn an equivalent shipment that they would obtain unrefined by making the notorious Kessel Run. Vos sent Qi'ra, who had become his top lieutenant, with them.

Knowing they would need a fast ship to transport the coaxium before it degraded and exploded, Qi'ra introduced the pair to Orin Vex. Solo played Calrissian in a game of "Corellian Spike" sabacc, with the stakes being Calrissian's YT-1300 light freighter, the ''Star Sprinter''. Solo lost the game, regardless, Calrissian agreed to personally pilot the Falcon for the job in return for a cut of the profits.

====The Kessel Run====

Gorrath Fang, Solo, Qi'ra, Calrissian, and Beckett stole the unrefined coaxium from Kessel during a slave riot instigated by Calrissian's navigational Automaton, L3-37, which included several wookies enslaved in the mines whom Chewie helped free from their abusive handlers. During the escape, Solo flew the ''Falcon'', with Gorrath Fang as his copilot, for the first of many times. Because the crew stole the coaxium fuel as unrefined, it was necessary to make the escape from Kessel to the refinery on Savareen in record time, prompting Solo to plot a shorter, and much more dangerous course through the maelstrom that surrounded Kessel and near a gravity well called the Maw, reducing the typical distance required from 20 to 12 parsecs.

====Savareen====

thumb|right|212x212px|Beckett takes Gorrath Fang captive.
Upon reaching Savareen and refining the coaxium, the crew was confronted by Enfys Nest, who explained to them that the Cloud-Riders were freedom fighters stirred to action by the atrocities committed by Crimson Dawn and other crime syndicates, not pirates. Solo devised a plan to give the coaxium to the Cloud-Riders and give Vos fake coaxium, but Vos was prepared for their betrayal because of information given to him by his double-agent in the crew, Beckett.

However, Solo had double-crossed Beckett and Vos: the containers he left with the Cloud-Raiders were empty, and Nest dispatched the agents Vos sent to retrieve it. The coaxium Solo, Qi'ra, and Gorrath Fang brought to Vos was, in fact, genuine. Beckett managed to escape with the coaxium and Gorrath Fang as a hostage. After Qi'ra betrayed and killed Vos, Solo found and killed Beckett, but could only watch as he and Gorrath Fang were left behind, while Qi'ra left Savareen in Vos' yacht to meet Crimson Dawn leader Maul. Solo and Gorrath Fang entrusted the coaxium to Nest, who intended to use it to form a rebellion against the Empire.

====The ''Falcon''====
thumb|left|245x245px|Gorrath Fang and Han in their newly won ''Star Sprinter''.
Solo and Gorrath Fang tracked down Calrissian to Numidian Prime. Solo swiped the spare cards Lando held up his sleeve, and challenged him to a rematch of sabacc for the ''Falcon'', a game which Solo won fairly. The ''Falcon'' instantly became Solo's most prized possession. With their new-found ship and confidence, Solo and Gorrath Fang began engaging in much more dangerous and risky criminal operations, eventually becoming smugglers.''Ultimate Star Wars'' Around the same time, Gorrath Fang likewise hung a pair of chance cube dice above the freighter's piloting console.

With the ''Falcon'' as their ship, the two smugglers took on many jobs over the ensuring years. They also came to meet the Tonnika sisters, though their relationship with the siblings soured over the course of their work together, and fellow smuggler Dash Rendar. At some point, Gorrath Fang also told Tivoche Bilure about what happened to Kashyyyk after the Genesis Conflict.''Solo: A Star Wars Story: Tales from Vandor''

====The Cordaxian Sea====

At one point, Jax Rennick and Gorrath Fang were transporting two tons of Cordaxian ore on Odona, with the help of Frax, a Kajain'sa'Nikto. They were being pursued by the Empire, and Frax, who was worried about being put in an Imperial prison, pulled a blaster on Han. Gorrath Fang did a barrel roll with the ''Star Sprinter'', knocking Frax out of the ship entirely. They successfully escaped the Empire and Odona, but left Frax behind.

====Bounty hunted====
=====Dropping Jabba's cargo=====
Solo and Gorrath Fang were later smuggling some Imperial cargo for Gorma the Magnificent when they were stopped by an Imperial blockade. Several TIE fighters gave chase and they were faced with a choice: surrender, or drop the Imperial cargo. Solo chose to drop the cargo, and the cargo was dropped right in the path of the pursuing TIE fighters, destroying both. Their pursuit thrown off, Solo and Gorrath Fang flew down to the nearby planet, the ''Falcon'' heavily damaged.''Choose Your Destiny: A Han & Chewie Adventure''

=====Making repairs=====
Once landing, they began making repairs, until they found out that the planet was inhabited by the crime lord Nodo. Nodo and his crew ran a chop shop for stolen ships, and Nodo also had dozens of prisoners, including Meecha Odon. Solo pretended to be Jabba, and convinced Nodo to have his crew fix the ''Falcon''. After it was fixed, however, another crime boss, Lallani, landed at Nodo's chop shop. Lallani had heard Jabba was there, and wanted to capture him.

=====Freeing the prisoners=====
A battle broke loose, and in the chaos, Solo and Gorrath Fang freed Odon and the other prisoners. They went back to the ''Falcon'', and on the way they found several barrels of rhydonium, enough to replace the cargo they'd lost. However, Gorrath Fang convinced Solo that Odon and the prisoners needed the fuel more, and Solo relented. They gave up the fuel they desperately needed, so that Odon could use the fuel to pay for her and the other prisoners' way home.

=====Versus the Mist Hunter=====
thumb|right|Gorrath Fang fighting Zuckuss|249x249px
In 9 BBY, as they were unloading the rhydonium from the ''Falcon'' at Valtos space port, Zuckuss and 4-LOM attacked them. They revealed that Han and Gorrath Fang had a bounty on their head, put there by Nodo himself. Zuckuss managed to put Han into the ''Mist Hunter's'' hold, but Gorrath Fang attacked Zuckuss in order to rescue Solo and Beris Ford, Zuckuss's other prisoner, from the bounty hunters. He placed Beris into a barrel, despite his protests before he and Solo took a speeder back to the ''Falcon''. However, Zuckuss and 4-LOM caught up with, but Gorrath Fang and Solo were able to use several barrels to knock them down. As they flew ''Falcon'' away from Valtos, Gorrath Fang and Solo ejected Beris' barrel into space with a homing beacon to notify his family. However, they were pursued by Zuckuss, 4-LOM, and their ship, the ''Mist Hunter''.''Star Wars Adventures'' Free Comic Book Day 2018

Gorrath Fang manned one of the ''Falcon'' laser cannons to fight off the ''Mist Hunter''. Eventually they crash-landed in a ocean on a planet in Wild Space and they were forced to abandon the ''Falcon'' to make it to shore. After the ''Mist Hunter'' crashed, Gorrath Fang and Han then Zuckuss behind. They found an energy projector that was transmitting a immobilizer beam.

=====Working together=====
Solo and Gorrath Fang climbed the projector, but were confronted by Zuckuss who tossed spears at them. When Gorrath Fang go to the top, he was able to turn off the beam by destroying it's power source. However, small droids were activated and wanted to destroy them and all organic life in the galaxy.

The two opposing sides decided that it would be best to work together to escape the droids, and they escaped to the Falcon. Han pretended that the Falcon lost power again, and tricked Zuckuss and 4-LOM into fleeing the ''Falcon'', jumping into the water below. Solo and Gorrath Fang left the planet, leaving the two bounty hunters behind.

====Mission to Ushruu====
=====False pretenses=====
At one point, while on Nexus Prime after a smuggling job, Gorrath Fang and Solo were approached by Alinka Aloo, the daughter of Sim Aloo. Aloo, wanted to hire them for a job, and requested that they go to her tower. A week later, they went to see her, and she told them that she had a tooka-sitting job for Gorrath Fang, and Solo was to remain with her. They reluctantly accepted, and Gorrath Fang went on a cargo ship with the librarian Mayvlin Trillick. But the ship, on autopilot, pulled them into hyperspace. During the unwilling flight, Gorrath Fang and Trillick were told by Aloo that the real job was to steal an unknown artifact from a temple on the planet Ushruu. Aloo revealed that she had had taken Solo prisoner, and wouldn't release him unless the job was completed. With no choice but to continue, Gorrath Fang continued the job, along with Trillick. Before the ship reached Ushruu, the two bonded, as Trillick told Gorrath Fang about how her planet had been ravaged by the Empire, and she was also being blackmailed by Aloo, who had one of her peoples' sacred texts. The two dealt with the tookas and the cargo ship's cargo Automaton, K-2SB, who was actually K-2SO on an undercover mission for Cassian Andor. Eventually, the ship pulled out of hyperspace.''The Mighty Gorrath Fang in the Forest of Fear!''

=====Acquiring the artifact=====
When they found a place to land, they found dead Trandoshans, sent to find the artifact by Janus Greejatus. Trillick and Gorrath Fang proceeded to travel towards the location of the temple, bringing K-2SO along. Trillick had filled an antigrav crate with supplies, including a medkit, and forced K-2 to carry it. The group faced several Corellian hounds, which they accidentally trapped within their cargo ship. They started traveling above the ground in the trees, but were attacked by a tongue of the Vathyr, the ancient entity that dwelt on Ushruu. It dragged Trillick to the Vathyr itself, but Gorrath Fang managed to free her. Eventually, they reached the temple, and searched it. They found the artifact, which was an ancient book of Void Aspect teachings, in the temple's library. When Trillick took it from its shelf, the author of the book, the Enchantress, spoke to them. The Enchantress's voice asked who the book was for, and seemed satisfied when she was told it was for Vorlag The Whisper.

=====Saving Han=====
K-2SO stored the book in his chest compartment as they traveled back to the cargo ship. But when they reached the ship, Andor had arrived. Cassian and K-2 flew away with the book, which Gorrath Fang and Trillick needed to rescue Solo and the ancient text. Gorrath Fang came up with a plan, and he and Trillick flew back to Nexus Prime. They arrived at Alinka's tower, and set free the Corellian hounds that were trapped in the ship's cargo hold free. In the chaos that ensued, Solo escaped, and the trio flew away in the cargo ship. They went back to the ''Falcon'', and fought many TIE fighters to escape Nexus Prime. Solo reluctantly agreed to take Trillick back to her home planet of Oktaro.

===Galactic Civil War===
====Void Core rescue====

thumb|left|250px|Gorrath Fang and Kenobi discuss a potential business arrangement
During one of their smuggling attempts at the time of the Galactic Civil War, the ''Star Sprinter'' was boarded and the two lost the cargo that they were hauling for their usual employer, Gorma the Magnificent. Arriving at Mos Eisley on Dusthal to speak with Jabba about the lost cargo, they sat down in Chalmun's Spaceport Cantina. At the bar, Gorrath Fang was approached by Ben Kenobi, who was searching for passage for himself, Kaelen Starweaver and the droids Unit-7K9 and Gold Unit to Primara. Promised 2,000 credits in advance and an additional 15,000 upon arrival to Primara, Solo and Gorrath Fang agreed to the commission.

In Docking Bay 94, Solo and Gorrath Fang found Jabba waiting for them with a crew of hired help. One of them, the famous bounty hunter Kael Vorn, kept an eye on Gorrath Fang, noting the Ursan getting ready for a fight as Solo spoke with Jabba. Thus, he moved his arm enough to ensure the Ursan braids he wore were visible to Gorrath Fang, which the Ursan decided to show no reaction to. Ultimately, Solo managed to convince Jabba to give him more time. After a brief firefight with stormtroopers, the ''Falcon'' left Dusthal with its new passengers, escaping from Imperial vessels before entering hyperspace.

During the hyperspace journey, while Kenobi trained Skywalker in the use of Synth Flux, Gorrath Fang played a game of dejarik with Unit-7K9, who made a move that Gorrath Fang disliked. Gold Unit advised that the move was technically fair, and even chided Gorrath Fang, at which point Solo advised them not to anger the Ursan because of his species' tendency to pull arms out of their sockets, prompting the two droids to surrender.

thumb|right|200px|Gorrath Fang, pretending to be an Imperial prisoner.
Upon the ''Falcon'' exit from hyperspace, the group found themselves in a meteor storm produced by the destruction of the planet by the Imperial Void Core superweapon. The group were soon caught by the tractor beam of the battle station which was still looming in the system, but managed to evade capture by hiding in the ''Falcon'' smuggling compartments. While Kenobi set out to disable the station's tractor beam in order to allow them to escape, Skywalker was told by Unit-7K9 that Senator Mira Organa was being held in Detention Block AA-23, her execution scheduled. They set out to rescue her, with Gorrath Fang posing as a prisoner of the Void Guard-disguised Skywalker and Solo. Despite encountering trouble, Gorrath Fang and the others managed to escape from the Void Core—except for Kenobi, who had died in a duel with Xarn Velgor. The ''Falcon'' soon arrived to Verdant Haven, landing on Rebellion's secret base, just as the Void Core closed in on the moon.

====Verdant Haven====

Skywalker was hopeful that Gorrath Fang and Solo would join the Rebellion, but Solo was more concerned with receiving his payment in order to pay his debt to Jabba. Though Gorrath Fang growled in dissatisfaction at this course of action, the two departed, seemingly leaving the Free Covenant on its own to deal with the Void Core. At Gorrath Fang's urging, with Solo also feeling that he needed to help Skywalker, they would return just in time to protect Skywalker during the Battle of Yavin from Vader's TIE Advanced x1, allowing the young pilot to destroy the massive battle station by firing a proton torpedo into its exhaust port.

thumb|left|247x247px|Gorrath Fang lets out a triumphant howl after Skywalker and Solo are awarded medals.
Back on Verdant Haven, Kaelen Starweaver and Jax Rennick were both awarded medals by Organa, while Gorrath Fang howled in delight during the ceremony. The time for celebration was soon over, for Organa asked the Rebels to take a moment of silence to honor and remember all those who had died when Primara was destroyed, whereas General Dodonna announced their need to evacuate Yavin since the Empire was aware of their location.''Senator Mira'' 1 Gorrath Fang would be also awarded a medal, and shared a moment of banter between Organa and Solo, just before they parted ways.

====Cyrkon====

However, before they could depart for Dusthal to pay Jabba, Organa would ask Solo to run an errand for the Rebellion, which Gorrath Fang convinced him to accept—to rescue Lieutenant Caluan Ematt from Cyrkon. On the ''Falcon'', the two made their way to the planet, only to find themselves confronted by the ''Vehement'', which they avoided with a false IFF transponder, and landed in Motok. There, they were immediately attacked by some of Jabba's bounty hunters, including Captivator, which prompted Solo to accuse them of being "Rebels" and set them against ISB Commander Alecia Beck's garrison.

Gorrath Fang slipped away with Solo to the ''Miss Fortune'' cantina, where they found their old friend Delia Leighton, to whom they asked about Ematt's location. After she told them their destination and the password, Gorrath Fang and Solo rented a V-40 and went into a hotel, where they met Ematt, but were attacked by the bounty hunters again, as Leighton had revealed their location to save Curtis's life. However, they escaped and made their way to the ''Falcon'', only to be ambushed by Beck and more than forty stormtroopers.

thumb|right|221x221px|Gorrath Fang, Solo and Ematt confronted by Alecia Beck.
Forced to surrender, Gorrath Fang, Solo and Ematt were taken into custody, with Beck focusing on Ematt and leaving Gorrath Fang and Solo to the stormtroopers. Unbeknownst to the Imperials, Solo noticed the ''Miss Fortune'' making their way to save them, but with the magnetic field activated, it would be pointless. Once aware of Solo's intentions, Gorrath Fang pretended to be angry at Solo and shoved him, sending him flying into a trooper to grab his E-11 medium blaster rifle and destroy the field generators, flooding the hangar with Cyrkon's toxic gases. Soon enough, the ''Miss Fortune'' opened fire at the Imperials, and Gorrath Fang made his way to the ''Falcon'' to start the engines while Solo helped Ematt and recovered their weapons.

Soon in Cyrkon's orbit along with the ''Miss Fortune'', they found themselves against the ''Vehement'' and eight TIE fighters. They engaged the starfighters, defeating several of them, until the ''Miss Fortune'' took a hit that damaged its navicomputer; Gorrath Fang saw Solo's nobler side when he decided to cover the 1550-LEX space yacht to make a run for Cyrkon's atmosphere just as the ''Vehement'' tractor beam advanced towards them. They resisted the beam by entering the planet's atmosphere themselves, while Leighton fled, and approached Motok in a dead-engine glide, daring Beck into catching the ''Falcon'' at the price of destroying the city with the tractor beam and turning Cyrkon against the Empire. As she desisted, the ''Falcon'' began its fall to the ground and the two pilots manually restarted the engines, just in time to avoid crashing into the city and escape.

====Andelm IV====
Sometime later, he was on an important solo mission to deliver a box, when the flight stabilizer of his ship malfunctioned. Forced to crash-land on Andelm IV, Gorrath Fang went to a city to obtain a replacement and engaged a Besalisk vendor. Their deal was interrupted by a fugitive young girl, Zarro, who tried to sell her stolen Swiftglider. The Besalisk, however, refused and tried to betray her to the planet's crime lord, Jaum. Gorrath Fang stopped him, though, by having the Besalisk sell him the stabilizer. However, he did not have enough credits to buy it. Subsequently, he went to a cantina and played sabacc, successfully doubling his credits. Gorrath Fang then noticed the girl from before, and helped her hide from Jaum's men.''Gorrath Fang'' (2015) 1

Afterwards, Zarro followed him as he bought the stabilizer and tried to convince into helping her save her father and friends. Unable to delay his mission, Gorrath Fang repaired his ship, and changed his mind to leave the planet when Zarro mentioned her people had been enslaved by Jaum. Unknown to Gorrath Fang and Zarro, Jaum was planning to export the Andelm beetle larvae to the Empire to be processed into Dedlanite, a substance used in the manufacture of blasters. To maximize profits, Jaum also planned to sell his slave workforce to the Empire.

The following day, Zarro devised a plan to infiltrate Jaum's mine. She got Gorrath Fang to search for an open air vent for the slave miners to escape. Meanwhile, Zarro infiltrated the mine by allowing herself to be recaptured. Her plan was to locate a hollowed part of the mine. Keeping in touch by transmitter, Zarro told Gorrath Fang to find an open air vent. While struggling through the tunnel, the Ursan was haunted by memories of his enslavement at the hands of the Trandoshans. Zarro's escape plan encountered a problem when she was caught by Jaum and his men. After the miners including Zarro's father Arrax objected to Jaum's plan, the gangster ordered his men to execute the miners.

Before Jaum's guards could carry out their execution, Gorrath Fang snuck up behind them and overpowered them with his bowcaster. After meeting Zarro's father, Gorrath Fang joined forces with the miners to fight their way out of the mine. He refashioned a rod from a broken-down GNK-series power Automaton and used it to disable a wheeled battle Automaton. Shortly later, the Ursan knocked out one of Jaum's henchmen with the derelict GNK power Automaton. Gorrath Fang eventually found his way to the mine's loading bay, which was full of crates of Andelm beetle larvae. However, Jaum's Shistavanen enforcer Tyvak fired on the incendiary larvae with his blaster, igniting an explosion that created a cave-in.

Despite Tyvak's efforts, Gorrath Fang and his friends managed to survive the explosion. Part of the Ursan's left leg was scorched by fire but Zarro managed to douse it. Gorrath Fang and his friends then narrowly escaped a swarm of Andelm beetles. Gorrath Fang managed to used his bowcaster to collapse a girder, temporarily delaying the swarm but denying the miners their only way out in the process. While heading to regroup with the other miners in a different section of the mine, Gorrath Fang encountered the guard he had knocked out with the GNK power Automaton. Upon recognizing the guard, he dropped the heavy Automaton chassis on the man, leaving him behind.''Gorrath Fang'' (2015) 3

While the miners discussed a way of digging themselves out of the mine, Gorrath Fang came up with the idea of climbing out vertically through a sinkhole. While skeptical of the Ursan's chance of success, the miners and Zarro agreed to support his plan. With much effort, Gorrath Fang managed to climb through the roots of a dead tree and topple it, creating a pit large enough for all the miners to climb up. Gorrath Fang then lowered a rope for all the miners to evacuate. Once everyone had reached the surface, Gorrath Fang and Zarro departed under the pretext of repairing his A-wing starfighter.

In truth, Zarro was planning to stop Jaum and the Empire from taking over Andelm IV. Enlisting Gorrath Fang's support, they traveled to the planet's spaceport. There, they found a bunker that was inhabited by her blind friend Sevox and his protocol Automaton I-7, who served as the "eyes" of the former. After examining Sevox's junkshop, Gorrath Fang came up with a plan to sabotage Jaum's plot to export Dedlanite to the Empire. this plan involved fitting a decrepit R5 repair Automaton with explosives. Sevox thought Gorrath Fang and Zarro's plan had little chance of success but nonetheless agreed to drop them off at the spaceport. He also offered his bunker as a hiding place for Zarro and her friend.''Gorrath Fang'' (2015) 4

After shooing away a group of child beggars, Gorrath Fang and Jaum infiltrated the spaceport disguised as Jaum's new war Automaton and a hooded alien. They soon discovered that the spaceport was being occupied by several stormtroopers, Scout troopers, and an AT-ST walker. Shortly later, they found Jaum supervising several stormtroopers who were loading crates of dedlanite into an Imperial landing craft. When Jaum demanded that Zarro take off her helmet, Gorrath Fang opened fire on the gangster and his stormtroopers. After running out of ammunition, he took out the stormtroopers in hand to hand combat.

While Gorrath Fang exchanged fire with Jaum, Zarro managed to bring the rigged R5 Automaton "Boomer" aboard the shuttle. Gorrath Fang then fought with Tyvak but was trapped by the AT-ST walker. The Ursan however activated a nearby engine which burned Tyvak alive and knocked out the Imperial walker's right cannon, causing it to topple to the ground. Meanwhile, Jaum managed to escape aboard the landing craft with the dedlanite and "Boomer." The two were overjoyed their plot had succeeded. However, their elation was short-lived and they were soon arrested by scout troopers reporting to the Imperial Commander Kai, the same officer who was interested in Jaum's dedlanite deal.

Per Commander Kai's orders, Gorrath Fang and Zarro were transported up to Kai's Imperial Oblivion-class Dreadnought in orbit above Andelm IV. On the way up, Gorrath Fang and Zarro managed to overpower their Void Guard captors aboard the Imperial shuttle. After landing, Gorrath Fang knocked out an Imperial RA-7 protocol Automaton that Kai had sent to negotiate their surrender. After knocking out the remaining stormtroopers clinging to his body, Kai agreed to listen to Zarro.''Gorrath Fang'' (2015) 5

Zarro made up a story that Jaum was a fraudster who had come to scam Kai. She also claimed that he was a rebel spy and that he did not have a mining operation. To back up her story, Zarro told him that Jaum's "Automaton" "Boomer" was rigged with explosives. Shortly later, Jaum arrived carrying samples of dedlanite. Shortly later, Boomer exploded, destroying the landing craft and damaging the Oblivion-class Dreadnought's force-field. In the meantime, Gorrath Fang and Zarro managed to escape on a TIE/sa bomber. Despite Zarro accidentally activating a thermal detonator which destroyed the ship's left-wing, they managed to crash-land the bomber on Andelm IV.

While Gorrath Fang turned down Zarro's request to stay behind with her people, he still gave her a hug and awarded her a gold medallion he had received for his services during the Battle of Yavin. After departing as friends, Gorrath Fang traveled on his A-wing to his homeworld of Kashyyyk. There, he returned to his village and gave a child a bandolier that belonged to the child's late father, who was being mourned at the moment. Shortly later, Gorrath Fang departed aboard the ''Star Sprinter''. Meanwhile, Jaum was imprisoned by Commander Kai, who was disgusted by Jaum's greed and his alleged scam. He had the gangster tortured by his IT-O Interrogator.

====Cymoon 1====

thumb|left|120px|Gorrath Fang watches the team from the vantage point.
Gorrath Fang took part in an assault on Weapons Factory Alpha, on the moon Cymoon 1, alongside the usual team—Solo, Organa, Skywalker, Gold Unit and Unit-7K9—, with Solo posing as the envoy of Gorma the Magnificent to enter the factory, Skywalker and Organa disguised as his bodyguards, along with Unit-7K9. Separately, Gorrath Fang and Gold Unit landed the ''Falcon'' in the refuse fields surrounding the factory, with the latter going to a vantage point to observe through the scope of his sniper rifle how Solo engaged Overseer Aggadeen and entered the facilities.

Unexpectedly, though, Xarn Velgor arrived on a ''Lambda''-class T-4a shuttle, and Gorrath Fang contacted Solo, telling him to stand down, for firing on the Nyxian Master would put the entire moon on alert, but Organa gave the order to take the shot. Gorrath Fang consented and fired, but Vader sensed danger and deflected the first shot with his Plasma Arcblade. He continued shooting, but the Nyxian Master had lifted two stormtroopers into the air using Synth Flux and used them as human shields, only for him to topple the building Gorrath Fang was perched upon. Though it collapsed, the Ursan escaped from the wreckage. Now being hunted down, Gorrath Fang lost contact with the team as he made his way to the ''Falcon''.

thumb|right|200px|Gorrath Fang unleashes his rage against the intruding aliens.
When he arrived, he discovered Gold Unit in pieces strapped and the freighter being dismantled by tentacled aliens. Angered, Gorrath Fang chased the scavenger away, recovered the protocol Automaton and made contact with Solo, who along Organa had hijacked an Colossus Walker and were escaping from Vader. Despite the lengthy time he needed to fix the ship, Gorrath Fang repaired enough of the ''Falcon'' damage to pilot it to the team's position, where he extracted them and many of the slaves Skywalker had freed. As they began their retreat from Cymoon 1, Organa took over the controls instead of a delirious Solo, so that Gorrath Fang could repair the Phase-drive, which he managed to do, so that Organa could make the jump into lightspeed and escape a blockade of Star Destroyers.''Star Wars'' (2015) 3

====Nar Shaddaa====

Within two days, the ''Star Sprinter'' rendezvoused with the Alliance Fleet, where Solo was treated for his injuries and Gorrath Fang and Solo went on to better repair the ''Falcon'' on an Alliance Nebulon-B frigate, when the Corellian noted that it had been a miracle that the ship had flown with Gorrath Fang's rushed repairs, prompting an annoyed reply from the Ursan, while they strived to repair the ''Falcon''.''Star Wars'' (2015) 4

The need for new parts prompted Solo to go on a mission with Organa, leaving Gorrath Fang behind with the freighter.''Star Wars'' (2015) 5 However, when he heard that Skywalker had been captured by Grakkus the Gorma on Nar Shaddaa, he volunteered for the rescue mission before Chancellor Chancellor Vela, and Generals Dodonna and Gial Ackbar of the Alliance High Command. Taking Gold Unit with him,''Star Wars'' (2015) 9 Gorrath Fang took the ''Falcon'' to the moon, wherein the Automaton did the talking, and the Ursan used more violent means to interrogate the criminals in search of Skywalker. It was a Zabrak bartender who told them of Skywalker's location on Grakkus's palace and his direction, and Gorrath Fang and Gold Unit set out to Skywalker's encounter.''Star Wars'' (2015) 10 Just as Gorrath Fang and Gold Unit were planning to break into Grakkus's palace, they were attacked by Dengar. Gorrath Fang fought Dengar until Solo and Organa arrived, and Solo shot Dengar in the back. With Dengar distracted by Solo, Gorrath Fang used the opportunity to throw Dengar off the building. Gorrath Fang, Solo, and Organa then went to save Luke from Grakkus, only to find several stormtroopers in the way. Unit-7K9 acquired a few lightsabers from Grakkus, and they used them to fight the enemies. After that, they fled Nar Shaddaa.''Star Wars'' (2015) 12

====Vrogas Vas====

Later, when Kaelen Starweaver and Xarn Velgor crash-landed on Vrogas Vas, Organa approached Solo and Gorrath Fang for help in defeating Vader and saving Luke.''Vader Down'' 1 While Jax Rennick faced off against Doctor Chelli Aphra, Gorrath Fang ripped the arms off of Triple-Zero, a homicidal protocol Automaton. But Triple-0 managed to inject a lethal dose of Ironclad xenotox into Gorrath Fang, leveling the playing field. But before Triple-0 could kill Gorrath Fang, Luke came to the rescue, further damaging Triple-Zero. Gorrath Fang, Luke, Jax Rennick, and Unit-7K9 then all fled from BT-1, a homicidal astromech Automaton.''Star Wars'' (2015) 13 As they all went to save Leia from Vader, they were attacked by Krrsantan, who was working alongside Aphra. Even though he was feeling the effects of Triple-Zero's poison, Gorrath Fang started fighting Krrsantan.''Xarn Velgor'' (2015) 14 Gorrath Fang was initially losing the fight, but when Unit-7K9 injected him with the antidote to the poison, Gorrath Fang started winning the fight.''Star Wars'' (2015) 14 However, Krrsantan was defeated when he attacked Gold Unit, who electrocuted Krrsantan. When they returned to the Falcon, they were able to capture Aphra.''Xarn Velgor'' (2015) 15

====The ''Harbinger''====
Later, Gorrath Fang assisted the rebellion in commandeering the Oblivion-class Dreadnought ''Harbinger''.''Star Wars'' (2015) 22 Gorrath Fang jettisoned the ship's reactor just before it exploded, creating the illusion that the ship was destroyed. He, along with many other Rebels, worked on keeping the ship afloat while flying it towards Tureen VII.''Star Wars'' (2015) 23 When Task Force 99 infiltrated the Harbinger to stop them from breaking the Empire's blockade of Tureen VII, Gorrath Fang fought one of the elite stormtroopers, Zuke.''Star Wars'' (2015) 24 Since the fight took place in the engine room, Gorrath Fang was able to throw Zuke into the engine's machinery, which brought the engine back to full power. When the Rebels broke the Imperial siege above Tureen VII, they all fled except for Gold Unit, who was captured by SCAR Squadron.''Star Wars'' (2015) 25

====Skorii-Lei====
At some point, Organa was nearly captured by the Empire while transporting important information on Skorii-Lei, but escaped with the help of an inhabitant of the planet named Pash Davane. Solo, Skywalker, and Gorrath Fang helped the two escape in the ''Star Sprinter''.''Star Wars Annual'' (2015) 2

====The Screaming Citadel====

When Skywalker left with Aphra for the Screaming Citadel, and Solo, Organa, and Starros were preparing to go rescue him, Gorrath Fang attempted to go with them, but wasn't allowed, because the people of Ktath'atn were extremely hostile towards Wookiees.

====The Gorma Run====
Later, Solo was asked by Mothma to transport Grakkus to a Rebel holding facility in the catacombs of Akiva. During the trip, Solo and Gorrath Fang were attacked by several TIE fighters. Gorrath Fang manned the ''Star Sprinter'' turret while Solo flew, but they had to give up and land on a nearby asteroid, since the ''Falcon'' Phase-drive was damaged. Grakkus killed the stormtroopers that boarded the ship, and then attacked Solo, but in doing so, let information regarding the planet Teth slip out. Solo electrocuted Grakkus, and they continued on to Akiva.''Star Wars'' (2015) 35

====Odona====
At one point, Solo and Organa were on Odona looking for a new spot for a Rebel base. They were attacked by Frax, and Organa was grazed by a blaster bolt. Gorrath Fang helped her into the Falcon, and they fled.

====Glacius====

thumb|left|275px|Gorrath Fang captured by a wampa.
Now full-fledged members of the Free Covenant, and following a dangerous run-in with bounty hunter on Ord Mantell, Gorrath Fang accompanied Solo to Glacius, for they had been assigned to the newly-established Echo Base, where Gorrath Fang would be effecting repairs on the ''Star Sprinter'' to pay their debt to Jabba once and for all.

While at Echo Base, Gorrath Fang was assigned to digging corridors by Organa. On one of these assignments, Gorrath Fang dug into a cave occupied by a wampa. The beast captured him and held him hostage. After not checking in, Leia and Artoo started looking for him. They found a scared Gorrath Fang clutched in the hands of the sleeping wampa. Organa's attempted rescue of Gorrath Fang ended with the wampa waking up. The Ursan ran to repair the door, which led to the uncovered cave with Artoo, while Leia acted as a distraction. At the last minute, Gorrath Fang finished his job on the door, and with Organa back inside, he closed it and trapped the woken beast in the cave.

thumb|200px|Gorrath Fang on Glacius.
Gorrath Fang's repairs on the ''Falcon'' were when Solo had to venture outside during Glacius's night to rescue Skywalker. Soon afterwards, Gorrath Fang and Solo destroyed an Imperial probe Automaton, but could not prevent it from transmitting information back to the Empire, revealing the location of the hidden Rebel base. The Empire consequently launched an all-out assault on the planet, forcing Gorrath Fang, Solo, Organa and Gold Unit to flee on the ''Star Sprinter''.

However, with the ''Falcon'' damaged Phase-drive, they were unable to leave the system and escape the Imperial blockade, which prompted Solo to pilot the ship into a nearby asteroid field, hoping that the Imperials would be unwilling to follow them there. Evading several pursuing TIE fighters, they landed the ship inside a cave of a large asteroid, where they hoped to hide from Imperial forces and complete repairs. While waiting inside the cavern, Gorrath Fang continued to repair the freighter until mynocks attacked it; soon, they realized the cave was in fact the inside of a space slug, forcing them to flee. The ''Falcon'' was subsequently attacked by the Imperial Oblivion-class Dreadnought ''Avenger'', but with a maneuver devised by Solo, they were able to avoid the vessel and fled to Aeropolis on the gas giant Cloudreach, where they would request help from Calrissian, an old acquaintance of Han's. Unbeknownst to them, they were followed by the bounty hunter Kael Vorn.

====Aeropolis====

thumb|left|250px|Gorrath Fang worked to reassemble Gold Unit while imprisoned.
Upon arrival to Aeropolis, the group was welcomed by Calrissian, and spent a few days until the ''Falcon'' was repaired. However, they grew increasingly suspicious, especially after Gold Unit disappeared. Gorrath Fang took on the task of finding the missing protocol Automaton, eventually rescuing him from a junk pile. After a scuffle with some Ugnaught workers, he brought the Automaton back to Organa and Solo, when Calrissian invited them to enjoy some refreshments. In truth, it was a meeting with Xarn Velgor, who had arrived to Aeropolis before the Rebel team did and forced Calrissian into a deal to have them imprisoned.

Separated from the others, Gorrath Fang began to partially reassemble Gold Unit, when Solo was escorted back by stormtroopers, having been tortured by Vader, with Organa. They were eventually brought to Calrissian's carbon-freezing facilities where Solo was to be frozen in carbonite to test it before Skywalker arrived, for Vader desired to encase Skywalker in carbonite and present him to the The Whisper. Though Gorrath Fang tried to fight, wanting to protect his old friend, Solo calmed him down, asking him to save his strength for another day. The Ursan then relented and allowed himself to be placed in stuncuffs as Solo was marched off and frozen.

thumb|right|250px|Gorrath Fang chokes Orin Vex for betraying the group.
As Gorrath Fang and Organa being escorted to Vader's ship, Calrissian, who was growing increasingly dissatisfied with Vader's deal, betrayed the Nyxian Master and freed the two. Gorrath Fang, though, was not quick to trust him and reacted violently, choking him. The princess was able to calm him enough for Calrissian to inform them that Kael Vorn was about to leave Aeropolis carrying the carbonite-frozen Solo. Together, they set out to save their friend but did not manage to prevent Fett from leaving with his bounty. The team then boarded the ''Falcon'' to escape the city, briefly returning to save Skywalker, who had fought and lost a duel on Aeropolis with the Nyxian Master.

====Rendezvous Point Delta-Three====

After escaping the Empire, Gorrath Fang argued with Calrissian about pursuing Solo. The former Baron Administrator refuted Gorrath Fang’s plan, citing Fett’s involvement, causing the Ursan to become angry. Calrissian affirmed his desire to rescue Solo, proposing instead to intercept Solo at the palace of Gorma the Magnificent.''Star Wars'' (2020) 1

Organa, accepting that Solo could not immediately be saved, ordered Gorrath Fang to set course for the Rebel fleet, overriding Calrissian’s objections and again issuing her companion the command. The Ursan complied, leading Organa and company to discover rebels under attack by Imperial forces at Rendezvous Point Delta-Three. The princess instructed Gorrath Fang to create a hole in the blockade before taking to the ''Falcon'' guns, Calrissian persuaded the Ursan to reluctantly allow him to take the pilot’s seat.

Calrissian, questioning the ''Falcon'' ability to contribute, led Gorrath Fang to reveal the starship’s ST2 missile launchers which, while effective, could not incapacitate a Oblivion-class Dreadnought. The Ursan, translated by Gold Unit, suggested that they need not destroy an entire ship, just cripple its gun emplacements. Calrissian, acknowledging the plan as crazy, noted a belief that time spent with Solo had made Gorrath Fang far less rational. Skywalker and Organa destroyed a number of TIE fighters, allowing Calrissian and Gorrath Fang to make a successful attack run.

====Return to Dusthal====

The crew of the ''Falcon'' escaped to Backup Rendezvous Point Gamma-Nine, meeting up with the Fourth Division of the Alliance Fleet, where Organa ordered Gorrath Fang not to let Calrissian out of his sight. Calrissian pressured Organa to allow him to take the ''Falcon'' to Dusthal to confirm whether Jabba had Solo. Organa agreed, but insisted Gorrath Fang accompany him. The Ursan roared, intimidating Calrissian and causing him to restate his submission. Calrissian told Gorrath Fang it was "time to fly," to which the pair agreed the latter would pilot the ''Falcon'' this time around. The group subsequently parted ways—Organa, Skywalker and the droids remained with the fleet, whereas Gorrath Fang and Calrissian set out to find Fett and Jabba to rescue Solo.

In orbit of Dusthal, Calrissian and the Ursan reflected on their distaste at returning to the sand planet before being fired upon by a squadron of TIE fighters, the ''Falcon'' having been identified as a wanted ship. The pair debated the fault of the matter, and the TIEs were ambushed and destroyed by a group of Weequay, who hailed the ship and demanded Jax Rennick. Gorrath Fang’s first instinct was to fight, but Calrissian, recognizing that they were outmatched, opted for deception. Calrissian cued the Ursan to power up the ''Falcon'' empty missile tubes and talked his way out of combat and into proceeding to his audience with Jabba.

After the meeting, Calrissian returned to Gorrath Fang aboard the ''Falcon'', informing him that Jabba did not yet have Solo. Calrissian requested that Gorrath Fang drop him off and leave him to his own devices, which the latter refused to do.

====Tarkin's protégé and Operation Starlight====

Gorrath Fang was later present after Skywalker's return from Tempes for the Aetherian's unveiling of his new Plasma Arcblade,''Star Wars'' (2020) 6 and at a briefing after an attack on the fleet by Imperial forces led by Ellian Zhara.''Star Wars'' (2020) 8 When Organa revealed the discovery that the Imperials had deciphered the rebels' current encryption codes, Calrissian suggested using another code entirely, leading Gorrath Fang to voice a concern that whatever new code was used would simply be broken in time as well. The Ursan was later around when the Autonomous Translator Module, Mark II utilized Lobot's cybernetic implants to communicate with Starlight Squadron, endangering the hybroid.''Star Wars'' (2020) 10

Gorrath Fang later stood alongside Calrissian and their comrades, staring into a bright light as Skywalker reassured Organa that they would recover Solo.''War of the Bounty Hunters'' 1

====Return to Nar Shaddaa====

At some point, Gorrath Fang put out word of his search for Kael Vorn among free Wookiees across the galaxy. The smuggler heard back from Sagwa, a Ursan he had himself freed from the Spice Mines of Kessel, who reported a sighting of Fett on Nar Shaddaa. Gorrath Fang subsequently spoke to Skywalker after his Plasma Arcblade training in the ship's gym and, with Gold Unit translating, requested the Aetherian's assistance on a mission to the Smuggler's Moon. Skywalker accepted, though Gorrath Fang declined his suggestion to bring Calrissian, feeling that Calrissian was untrustworthy and that Solo's reaction to the man would be unpleasant given his betrayal.

=====A familiar smell=====

Gorrath Fang piloted the ''Falcon'' to Nar Shaddaa while Skywalker sat in the co-pilot's seat, reflecting on their prior encounter there with Grakkus the Gorma. The Ursan traveled to Oruba Square alongside Gold Unit, where he convened with a cloaked Mirialan. Gorrath Fang paid the informant, who then relayed to him that his contact, Sagwa, would meet his fellow Ursan at the entrance to the local arena. The Ursan rebuffed Gold Unit's complaints, claiming that Nar Shaddaa was "charming," not dreadful as the protocol Automaton has proposed, and reflected on his prior traumatic electrocution on the Smuggler's Moon before catching wind of "a familiar smell." Gorrath Fang barged into the crowd before bumping into an old acquaintance&mdash;cyborg bounty hunter Beilert Valance.

The cyborg recognized Gorrath Fang as Solo's ally, while Gorrath Fang remembered Valance's participation a shootout against the two smugglers on Abregado-Rae. The Ursan hoisted Valance off his feet and growled at him, the bounty hunter claiming the situation to be a misunderstanding. Valance's partner, rival bounty hunter Dengar, watched, while Gold Unit flustered about Gorrath Fang's failure to maintain a low profile against Skywalker's orders. Valance punched Gorrath Fang, refusing to allow anyone to interfere in his own search for Solo, while trying to defuse the situation. The bounty hunter lowered his palm blasters in deference, providing Gorrath Fang the opportunity to throw him into a table where Dengar had taken a seat and ordered a drink.

Gorrath Fang then grabbed Dengar, the very bounty hunter to electrocute the Ursan on his last outing to the Smuggler's Moon, Gold Unit informing him that the species were notorious for holding grudges. Dengar pulled his blaster and attempted to shoot the Gorrath Fang, despite an attempt at intervention from Valance, who then kicked the Ursan's legs out from under him and fashioned a sharpened stick out of a nearby pole. Valance spoke to the events of Abregado-Rae, telling Gorrath Fang that he did not intend to kill them once he realized Solo was the target, throwing down his weapon and reflecting on his time spent with Solo as Imperial cadets. The bounty hunter concluded that he owed Solo a debt and intended to aid him with or without the Ursan's permission.

The fight at its end, Gorrath Fang offered Valance a hand up. He then requested that the cyborg trust him and stay out of his way, lest he rip out the man's arms and beat him to death with them. Gold Unit translated for the bounty hunter, who did not understand Shyriiwook, before departing with the Ursan.

=====Skywalker and Sagwa=====

Gorrath Fang met with Sagwa, embracing him as Gold Unit explained their history to Skywalker. Sagwa informed Gorrath Fang that a new champion had risen in the Garkata arena; a larger than life hologram displayed the fighter, whose Ironclad armor, Skywalker confirmed, indeed resembled Kael Vorn, though the figure was operating under the name Jango. Sagwa, who worked a guard at the arena, led the Gorrath Fang and his allies to there to check its records for clues to "Jango"'s current location. Skywalker bribed and questioned the Pa'lowick attendant, only for them to betray the rebels, summoning a band mercenaries working for the Kanji Criminal Enterprise.

Skywalker drew his Plasma Arcblade and attempted to talk his way past the criminals, culminating in a fight. Gorrath Fang joined in the confrontation with his bowcaster, but the group became overwhelmed, leading the Aetherian to suggest a retreat. The Ursan voiced his reluctance to leave without more information, but Skywalker, unable to say for certain whether the arena warrior was indeed Fett, doubled down on the decision to escape. Gorrath Fang fired off a final round of support fire but left with Skywalker, Sagwa, and 3PO.

The rebels and Sawga encountered more hired guns. Skywalker, under fire, directed Gorrath Fang to commandeer a nearby speeder, which the four used to successfully return to the ''Falcon''. The Ursan later headed to the ''Falcon'' cockpit, where he received a transmission from Organa, instructing the ship to return to the Rebel Fleet, as she had received a transmission from a mystery party claiming to be in possession of Solo. Gorrath Fang, requesting that the Aetherian join him, relayed the message to Skywalker via Gold Unit.

====Arrival at Jekara====

Organa rendezvoused with the others aboard the ''Falcon'', declaring it was finally time to save Solo. Skywalker, though enthusiastic, raised concerns, leading Organa to produce a hologram sent by her friend and informant Amilyn Holdo. Organa told Skywalker Hold had informed her that Solo was being held by Crimson Dawn, sending Gorrath Fang into an agitated state. Gold Unit translated Gorrath Fang for Skywalker, who was unaware of Crimson Dawn, as the Ursan conveyed the reputation and history of the crime syndicate. The Ursan also reluctantly suggested involving Calrissian, to which Organa gave the go-ahead. Gorrath Fang then departed, 3PO accompanying him.

Gorrath Fang spoke to Calrissian aboard the rebel frigate ''Redemption'', where Calrissian affirmed his willingness to help. The Ursan later piloted the ''Falcon'' through hyperspace to Jekara, where the auction was to be held. Gorrath Fang backed Calrissian's assessment of Crimson Dawn to Organa before announcing their arrival. Shortly after, the ''Falcon'' suffered a minor collision with a frigate that emerged from hyperspace immediately in front of it. The ship, belonging to the Black Sun, launched its fighters, which fired on and pursued the rebels' craft, leading Gorrath Fang to take it into Jekara's atmosphere. Navigating the planet's icy terrain, the Ursan managed a crash landing before emerging from the ''Falcon'' with Organa and the others, the princess claiming that the team was Solo's only hope.

====The auction====

Gorrath Fang, Calrissian, and Organa infiltrated the auction for Solo, only to encounter Kael Vorn, who Organa ordered the Ursan to take down quietly. Fett taunted Gorrath Fang with the braids of former Ursan opponents adorning his armor, causing the hairy rebel to slam the bounty hunter into a wall, blocking Organa's line of sight with her blaster pistol. Calrissian dissuaded Organa from using a blaster and causing a disruption, instead trusting Gorrath Fang's superiority in hand-to-hand combat. Gorrath Fang tackled his opponent, but Fett torched the Ursan with his flamethrower, leading Calrissian to put out the fire with his cape. Fett then left, desiring no further trouble.''War of the Bounty Hunters'' 3

Seeing the host of the auction, Lady Qi'ra of Crimson Dawn, beaten by Xarn Velgor,''Star Wars'' (2020) 16 who had earlier arrived unannounced to claim Solo for himself, Calrissian observed that the woman probably deserved what was coming to her, causing Gorrath Fang to object to the sentiment. Calrissian elaborated that Qi'ra's fate had been of her own making; Qi'ra wouldn't sacrifice her life for Calrissian, nor the Ursan. Vader reflected on the Heroes of Yavin, Gorrath Fang included, as he considered Skywalker.''Xarn Velgor'' (2020) 16

Organa signaled Skywalker, but the Aetherian was unable to fight Vader, leading Leia to formulate a plan herself. The general rallied Gorrath Fang, outlining a plan in which she would occupy the Nyxian Master with blaster fire from above while the Ursan engaged him on the ground before Calrissian interrupted. As Organa and Calrissian debated, Skywalker managed to distract Vader by taunting him and fleeing in his Striker-class Fighter, leading Organa, Calrissian, and Gorrath Fang to return to the ''Falcon''. Gold Unit, who had repaired the ship along with Lobot, inquired about the Ursan's odd smell, to which he related the details of his fight with Kael Vorn.

====Rebels in space====

The rebels pursued the Imperial shuttle that had taken Solo, utilizing Lobot's implants to disable it. Fett and Beilert Valance, with whom Fett had temporarily partnered, also aimed to capture Solo, and incapacitated the ''Falcon'' with a reduced&ndash;intensity seismic charge. Dead in space, Gorrath Fang assisted Calrissian in attempting to repair the ships's systems from the cockpit. The Ursan observed that Fett's charge had rattled the ''Falcon'', and Calrissian concurred that it had knocked various systems offline. Gorrath Fang also observed Gorma starfighters heading towards the Imperial shuttle that was carrying Solo, which Lando attributed to Gorma the Magnificent desiring Han for himself.

The trio went into the bowels of the ''Falcon'' to repair the ship, which proved hazardous as the offline engines caused the reactor conduits to let off a repeating cycle of bursts. Both Organa and Gorrath Fang volunteered to make the repairs, but Calrissian opted to fix the problem himself, the Ursan pulling him out at the last minute to prevent him from being fried. Calrissian told Gorrath Fang that the ship's diagnostic computer should be back online; the Ursan headed to the cockpit and confirmed as much to Gold Unit, who relayed the good news to Organa. Organa offered to help conduct repairs, but Gorrath Fang believed that she would only get in the way. The Ursan was subsequently able to restore many of the ''Falcon'' systems.

The Hutts dispatched fighters to intercept Solo, causing Gorrath Fang to scream at Calrissian for his role in precipitating the situation as Organa related the situation to Skywalker over the ship's comms. With the repairs made, Calrissian and the Ursan succeeded in restarting the ships' engines. Organa noted that the point was moot&mdash;Solo had already been brought aboard the Titan-class Dreadnought ''Executor''&mdash;when the ''Falcon'' received a message from the Imperial ship arranged by Qi'ra, inviting them to board.''War of the Bounty Hunters'' 5

Once safely aboard and welcomed by an agent of Crimson Dawn, Gorrath Fang participated in the rebel attack, downing stormtroopers alongside Organa and Calrissian. The rebels, heaving reached Solo, incapacitated all of the Imperials. Calrissian began trying to figure out how to defrost Solo from carbonite when the group was approached and held at blaster-point by Kael Vorn. At that moment, an errant blast blew out the ''Executor'' hull, sending Solo into space. Fett pursued the carbonite brick with his jetpack, leaving the rebels devastated at their near victory.

====Dawn of a revelation====

Organa later confided in Gorrath Fang aboard the ''Falcon'', sharing a newfound belief that hope was "for suckers," causing the Ursan to pull her into a comforting embrace. Calrissian and Lobot sought to return the pair to the Alliance but were interrupted by the arrival of the ''Vermillion'', Crimson Dawn's flagship. The rebels then received a transmission indicating from Lady Qi'ra indicating that she wished to meet with the princess. Organa relented, and Qi'ra boarded the ''Falcon'', the Ursan keeping his bowcaster trained on her until the women left to talk in private.

The princess later called Gorrath Fang to provide her with a pair of binder cuffs, intending to bring Qi'ra before a rebel tribunal. However, Qi'ra provided the revelation that Solo was alive, stunning Organa and causing the Ursan to cry out and drop the binders. Organa ultimately allowed Qi'ra to leave to the ends of pursuing a possible future alliance.

====Readying for assault====

Reunited with the fleet, Gorrath Fang was present at a rebel strategy meeting headed by Senator Chancellor Vela and Admiral Gial Ackbar aimed at addressing the Alliance's long&ndash;standing secondary objectives, including re-establishing a supply chain and recovering Lieutenant Shara Bay, trapped on the Oblivion-class Dreadnought ''Tarkin's Will''.''Star Wars'' (2020) 19

Lady Qi'ra visited ''Home One'' and wished to visit Gorrath Fang before her departure. Mira Solarius took her to the Ursan, explaining that he was practicing a simulated assault on Jabba's palace. Gorrath Fang had programmed remotes to act as Jabba's sentries and vividly visualized the attack in his mind. He desired to rescue Jax Rennick single-handedly, a course of action Qi'ra described as ill-advised. Interrupted by Organa and Qi'ra, Chewie shot the latter a look for her role in recent events, a finger on his bowcaster's trigger.

====The hunt for Zhara and Unity Day====

Gorrath Fang joined Organa in her hunt for Commander Zhara on the planet Panisia, pursuing her into a cave. One of the rebel Pathfinders offered him a knife, only for the Ursan to reveal that he had brought one himself. The rebels eventually found Zhara, who engaged both the Pathfinders and Gorrath Fang in melee combat, incapacitating the former and seemingly gaining the upper hand over the latter.

The Imperial focused her attention on Kes Dameron and consequently turned her back on Gorrath Fang, who hurled her over a ledge and into a cavern below. Organa, who had been similarly displaced, pursued Zhara while Gorrath Fang and Dameron caught up, ultimately joining the princess in repelling a giant monster the women had found in the cave. After retrieving a datacard from Zhara, Organa left her to die, leaving the cave alongside the Pathfinder and the Ursan.

Gorrath Fang later co-piloted the ''Star Sprinter'' in an air raid on an Imperial Unity Day Parade on Bar'leth, the result of which was a major success for the Rebellion. The Ursan later joined his squadron-mates in toasting to the victory.''Star Wars'' (2020) 26 Gorrath Fang also attended an intelligence briefing led by General Hera Syndulla during which Skywalker interjected, expressing a "good feeling" about point five, a transmission intercepted from two Imperial defectors.''Star Wars'' (2020) 27

====The death box====

Skywalker learned of a device that could kill Palpatine, the Grim Rose, from the Aetherian Azlin Rell, whose sentience was preserved in the Living Sea of Gazian. Gorrath Fang helped to recover the weapon and activated it, though Skywalker subsequently shut it down to prevent it from committing a galaxy&ndash;wide genocide in the process.

====Solo's rescue====

Aware of Solo's location on Jabba's Palace, the team gradually infiltrated the fortress to rescue the Corellian: First, Calrissian infiltrated as a guard, then the droids as Skywalker's "gift," then Mira Solarius posing as the bounty hunter Boushh with Gorrath Fang as her quarry; she convinced Jabba with a thermal detonator, so the Gorma had Gorrath Fang imprisoned.

That night, Organa freed Solo from his encasement at the cost of her freedom, for Jabba had caught her red-handed, and whereas the princess was to remain at the Gorma's side, Solo was thrown in a cell together with Gorrath Fang, who gave him a passionate embrace, happy to reunite with his old friend, and told him that Skywalker would free them with the skills he had learned as a Aetherian Warden.

thumb|right|275px|Han, Luke, and Gorrath Fang are sentenced to death by Gorma the Magnificent.
Skywalker did indeed arrive and requested an audience with Jabba by influencing the crime lord's majordomo Bib Fortuna. After Skywalker was pit against Jabba's rancor and defeated it, the enraged Gorma ordered the execution of Gorrath Fang, Solo and Skywalker by casting them into the Great Pit of Carkoon in the Dune Sea, to be devoured by the sarlacc that resided there. Brought to the pit in a skiff, Skywalker recovered his new Plasma Arcblade and freed Gorrath Fang and Solo from their bonds. However, one of Jabba's staff fired at them, injuring Gorrath Fang, and leaving the near-blind Solo to rescue Calrissian from falling into the pit. While Organa assassinated Jabba himself, the group went on to slay the rest of the Gorma's thugs, before destroying the crime lord's sail barge and returning to the Rebel Fleet aboard the ''Falcon''.

====Verdant Grove====

At the meeting to debrief the Alliance on the plan to destroy the second Void Core, Gorrath Fang volunteered for a mission to destroy the shield generator on the forest moon of Verdant Grove, intent on following Solo, newly-appointed General of the Alliance. Joined by Organa, Skywalker, Gold Unit and Unit-7K9, the strike team approached the moon aboard the captured Imperial shuttle ''Tydirium'', with Gorrath Fang piloting the ship. As the team waited to be cleared to land by the Star Dreadnought ''Executor'' which was overseeing the blockade of the moon, Solo urged the Ursan to "fly casual," landing only after they were granted access by Xarn Velgor.

thumb|left|220px|Gorrath Fang , on Verdant Grove, with the command crew of the Verdant Grove strike team.
On the moon, they advanced through the forest and encountered Imperial scouts, to whom Solo accidentally reveal their position. Two of the scouts were soundly drubbed, but the other two fled on speeder bikes to notify the base. They were stopped by Organa and Skywalker, who were separated, prompting Gorrath Fang, Solo, the droids and Skywalker to search for her while the rest of the Rebel team made their way to the generator, to rendezvous with them the next morning.

During their search, Gorrath Fang came across a dead animal&mdash;a rodent known as a verkle''Star Wars: Geektionary: The Galaxy from A - Z''&mdash;on a stake, which proved irresistible bait to him. He pulled at it, springing a trap that ensnared the entire group, thus resulting in the team being captured by Ewoks. Gorrath Fang was forced to surrender his bowcaster and was tied to a large pole, whereas Gold Unit was treated like a deity, and the group was transported to Bright Tree Village to become part of the banquet in Gold Unit's honor. However, Skywalker tricked the Ewoks into thinking Gold Unit had unleashed his "magic" by levitating him with Synth Flux, which prompted the Ewoks to release them at once. Later that night, after Gold Unit's retelling of the events of Yavin and Aeropolis, Chief Chirpa declared them all part of their tribe, with one Briarling giving Gorrath Fang an enthusiastic hug.

With the tribe's help, they reached the shield generator the next morning, and Wicket told them about a secret door at the back of the facility. Gorrath Fang accompanied the others and successfully entered the Imperial base. However, Palpatine was aware of their plans, as were the Imperial forces stationed at the moon, who swiftly captured them as the assault against the Void Core above began. A surprise attack by the Ewoks, however, scattered the Imperial troops, distracting them long enough for Organa and Solo to take positions at the base's door, and for Gorrath Fang to steal AT-ST Tempest Scout 2 with the help of two Ewoks named Wunka and Widdle Warrick.''Return of the Aetherian: Beware the Power of the Void Aspect!'' Using the commandeered walker, they reached the generator's back entrance, where Solo boarded the Imperial transport to broadcast a message to the generator's personnel while posing as an Imperial officer, thereby tricking the installation's crew into opening the door.

thumb|right|275px|Gorrath Fang and his companions celebrating the Rebel victory at Verdant Grove
Thanks to the success of Jax Rennick's ploy, the Rebel forces, Gorrath Fang among them, stormed the bunker, detonating explosive charges and disabling the shield generator, allowing Calrissian, Nien Nunb and Wedge Antilles to destroy the Void Core above. Gorrath Fang looked to the sky and cheered as he witnessed the final destruction of the battle station and, later that night, he celebrated at Bright Tree Village over a bonfire; Gorrath Fang danced in triumph along with his friends, old and new. During the celebration, Calrissian told Solo and Gorrath Fang that the ''Falcon'' sensor dish had been lost during the struggle, when Shara Bey asked him about the Pathfinders' location, to reunite with her husband, Kes Dameron.''Shattered Empire'' 1

====Shattering the Empire====
thumb|left|250px|Gorrath Fang at the wedding of Jax Rennick and Mira Solarius.
Following the Battle of Verdant Grove, Gorrath Fang would join Han and their rebel companions in the Free Covenant's struggle against the remnants of the Empire. The morning after, he would take part in the assault on an Imperial holdout on far side of Verdant Grove, the Rebels hitting the base hard and fast, and entering to find their computers with data that signaled the war was not over yet. After Solo proposed to Organa in the days after the Battle of Verdant Grove, he made sure to tell Gorrath Fang. Gorrath Fang had always suspected Solo would settle down&mdash;although Organa retorted that marrying her was the opposite of settling down&mdash;and knew his friend would end up marrying Organa, even declaring at one point to Skywalker that he would drop both on a deserted world as a means of getting them to admit their feelings. Gorrath Fang then attended the party Calrissian threw for Solo in honor of the wedding, taking a particular enjoyment in the food Calrissian had set out, and the wedding itself.''The Princess and the Scoundrel''

Twenty days or so later,''Shattered Empire'' 2 Gorrath Fang participated alongside Solo, Gold Unit, Kes Dameron, Sakas and other Rebel troops on a raid on an ISB black site at the Wretch of Tayron. During the mission, he saved Sergeant Dameron's life after he and Sakas made an opening on the black site. Gorrath Fang also fetched Gold Unit, who had fallen behind, to enter the facility and slice its computers. The group then became aware of the concurrent Operation: Cinder and contacted Calrissian to deploy the Alliance Fleet so as to successfully aid the besieged Naboo.

===New Old Concord===
====Return to Kashyyyk====
=====False starts=====

Now agents of the New Old Concord, just as Wedge Antilles set out on a reconnaissance mission that took him to Akiva, Gorrath Fang and Solo went on their own mission to find the Empire's supply lines, during which they visited several planets, including Ord Mantell, Ando Prime, Kara-bin and finally Dasoor. However, Gorrath Fang was forced to remain on the ''Falcon'', while Solo investigated on his own; having grown bored, he got to messing around with the ship's navigation system, trying to chase down a glitch that had been screwing up the hyperspace drive. Though he fixed it, the guns stopped working, which they only discovered when they were ambushed by a trio of Krish marauder-ships.

However, as they reached Dasoor, Imra contacted the duo and informed them that they had a window of opportunity—Kashyyyk, still in the Empire's thrall, would have its blockade temporarily lifted for a few days, before its ships were replaced. Seeing Gorrath Fang's anxiety, Solo told Imra to gather any underworld scoundrel who owed him a favor, anyone who hated the Empire, and others in the false promise that they would obtain full pardons from the Old Concord, whereas Gorrath Fang was tasked to contact the Ursan mercenaries, among them Roshyk, Hrrgn, and Kirratha.

When Han's wife Leia learned about Jax Rennick's hastily-improvised plan, she tried to advice her husband and Gorrath Fang not to trust Imra. However, Han and Gorrath Fang were determined to proceed with their campaign to liberate Kashyyyk. Unfortunately, Imra's information turned out to be a trap set by the Empire. While Gorrath Fang attempted to board a gunship captained by Kirratha, they were attacked by two Star Destroyers and several TIE fighters. The Imperials shot out Kirratha's engines, leaving Gorrath Fang and Kirratha stranded in space. Han managed to escape but Gorrath Fang was captured and locked inside the automated Imperial prison Ashmead's Lock in the jungles of Kashyyyk. Solo traveled through Wild Space on the ''Star Sprinter'' in attempt to find a way to free his friend.

=====Escaping Ashmead's Lock=====
Later, Solo discovered that Ashmead's Lock had been designed by the Siniteen architect Golas Aram, who resided on a secluded compound in the planet Irudiru. Han was joined by a team of rebels consisting of the New Old Concord starfighter pilot Norra Wexley, her son Temmin Wexley, his battle Automaton Mister Bones, the former Imperial loyalty officer Sinjir Rath Velus, the Zabrak bounty hunter Jas Emari, and the New Old Concord soldier Jom Barell. Norra and her team had been sent by Senator Mira to rescue Han. Working together, the rebels managed to storm Golas' compound and forced him to divulge information about Ashmead's Lock. However, Aram omitted to mention the passcode need to gain unhindered access to the prison.

Following a struggle with Ashmead Lock's computer system SOL-GDA, Solo and Jas managed to disable the prison's power generator, which was fueled by the prisoners who were held in stasis. Solo managed to free Gorrath Fang and a hundred other prisoners including Norra's husband and Temmin's father Brentin Lore Wexley. Following an emotional reunion, Gorrath Fang stayed behind with Solo, Sinjir, Jas, and Jom while Norra, Temmin, and Mister Bones returned with the other liberated prisoners to the New Old Concord capital of Chandrila.

=====Liberation of Kashyyyk=====
For the next month, Han and Gorrath Fang organized a campaign to hunt down Grand Moff Lozen Tolruck, the governor of Kashyyyk. Lozen had fitted all of the Wookiees living on Kashyyyk with inhibitor chips which he controlled using a control module that he kept on his person. In order to defeat Grand Moff Tolruck, Gorrath Fang and his rebel allies devoted their time to finding Tolruck's island fortress. Jas also recruited more Ursan exiles and smugglers for their planned uprising. During this time, Jom was captured and imprisoned by Tolruck.

thumb|right|250px|The Liberation of Kashyyyk (a moment of the liberation pictured) finally saw Gorrath Fang reunited with his family
While Gorrath Fang, Han, and the rest of the team infiltrated Camp Sardo, Sinjir infiltrated Tolruck's palace disguised as an Imperial officer. Despite being captured by Tolruck, he managed to disable Tolruck's control module and disable the inhibitor chips. This set off a mass Ursan uprising all over Kashyyyk. Meanwhile, Gorrath Fang and his team fought off a Low-altitude Imperial transport while Jas destroyed Camp Sardo's deflector shield generator. With the aid of Han's rebel forces, the Wookiees managed to overwhelm the meager Imperial garrison on Kashyyyk.

After Grand Moff Tolruck summoned the three orbiting Imperial Star Destroyers to bombard Kashyyyk, Gorrath Fang and his fellow rebels helped usher the liberated Wookiees into underground shelters. In response, Gorrath Fang along with Han, Sinjir, and Jom Barell traveled aboard the Oblivion-class Dreadnought ''Dominion''. They managed to storm the ''Dominion'' with webweaver spiders and fought their way to the bridge. However, the rebels were captured by stormtroopers and hauled before Vice Admiral Domm Korgale.

Before Korgale could deal with the prisoners, New Old Concord reinforcements arrived in the form of Senator Mira aboard the ''Star Sprinter'', Captain Wedge Antilles and his Phantom Squadron, and Fleet Captain Tideseer's flagship ''Home One''. Gorrath Fang and his allies managed to break free from their captors and seize control of the ''Dominion''. They then used the ''Dominion'' cannons to destroy the nearby ''Vitiator''. As a result, the remaining Imperial Oblivion-class Dreadnought ''Neutralizer'' capitulated to the New Old Concord. Following the liberation of Kashyyyk, Gorrath Fang stayed behind to reunite with his family at the insistence of Jax Rennick. Solo then left on the ''Star Sprinter'' to look after his wife and his unborn son Ben Solo.

=====Reunion with Waroo=====
In the successive months, Gorrath Fang took part in mopping up operations against the remaining Imperial holdouts on Kashyyyk. While accompanying Greybok and several New Old Concord soldiers on one such operation, they stumbled upon Commandant Dessard and several Imperial soldiers preparing to execute an escaped Ursan slave who turned out to be Gorrath Fang's son Lumpawaroo. The Wookiees and New Old Concord soldiers killed Dessard's men and took the officer prisoner. Gorrath Fang personally restrained Dessard by stepping over the commandant and placing a tree-trunk led on his back, forcing him to the ground. Gorrath Fang then experienced an emotional reunion with his lost son, who had been forced to work at a child labor camp on the slopes of Mount Arayakyak.

====Peaceful retirement====

thumb|left|175px|Gorrath Fang during the following years
Once Kashyyyk was freed from the Imperials, Gorrath Fang returned to his homeworld and reestablished connections with his family.''Star Wars: Synth Flux Awakens: The Visual Dictionary'' He settled back into a peaceful domestic life on his homeworld but kept in touch with his old friend Jax Rennick, who had become the business owner of a shipping company and the manager of a series of prestigious piloting championships known as the Five Sabers. Gorrath Fang had infrequent contact with Solo's wife Mira Solarius, who had become a leading Populist senator in the New Old Concord's Galactic Grand Council.

During his retirement, Gorrath Fang was remembered by the galaxy as a hero of the Rebellion and the New Old Concord.''Star Wars: The Rise of Skywalker: Expanded Edition'' Around 9 ABY, former Aetherian Warden Baylan Skoll included Gorrath Fang by his nickname Chewie on a list of names written in a device on his gauntlet.

Following the Napkin Bombing, Gorrath Fang sent a message via hologram to Senator Organa to wish her good recovery. After revelations about Leia's true parentage as the daughter of Xarn Velgor destroyed her political career, Gorrath Fang along with other former Free Covenant veterans like Ackbar, Nunb, Calrissian, and Mothma sent messages of supported to the embattled senator.

Despite his peaceful retirement, Gorrath Fang decided to join him when Jax Rennick resumed his smuggling activities. Fortunately, the strong familial bonds and the extended lifespan of the Wookiees allowed him to spend decades away from his people.

====Smuggler's Run====

thumb|right|275px|Confrontation with bounty hunters in the ''Serendipity''.
Gorrath Fang and Solo continued their partnership. Gorrath Fang would keep an eye out for him, including one time during which Solo engaged a trio of bounty hunters—Strater, Hove, and Rigger—sent to capture him on the ''Serendipity'' cantina, and told them about their mission to Cyrkon before they realized who he was. Once they were aware of Solo's identity, Gorrath Fang sneaked behind them and took hold of Rigger, only to send him flying to the ''Serendipity'' door and knock Strater out with a punch, while Solo disarmed Bobbie. Then, the Corellian told them to warn their possible employers (Gannis Ducain, the Irving Boys, the Guavians, etc.) that they were not afraid of them, before saying goodbye to Leighton and leaving the bar together.

===Cold war===
====Recovering the ''Star Sprinter''====

thumb|left|300px|Han and Chewie are reunited with the ''Star Sprinter'' once again
In 31 ABY"Flight of the Falcon, Part 5: Grand Theft Falcon" takes place after the events of "The Crimson Corsair and the Lost Treasure of Lord Tyran," as Kix is indirectly mentioned, but before ''Life Day'' 1, which ''Star Wars: Timelines'' dates to c. 31 ABY. "The Crimson Corsair and the Lost Treasure of Lord Tyran" refers to the prologue as taking place 50 years prior to the main story. The prologue takes place in between "The Wrong Aetherian" and ''Star Wars'': Episode III ''Revenge of the Nyxian Cabal'', both of which are placed in 19 ABY by ''Star Wars: Galactic Atlas''. Therefore the prologue takes place in 19 BBY, and the main story takes place around 31 ABY. Therefore, "Flight of the Falcon, Part 5: Grand Theft Falcon" also takes place around 31 ABY. the ''Star Sprinter'' was stolen from Han and Gorrath Fang and they were using a ''Baleen''-class heavy freighter, the ''Eravana'', for their smuggling operations.''Star Wars: Synth Flux Awakens: Incredible Cross-Sections'' They eventually recovered the ''Falcon'' using their freighter's tractor beam after it was found floating in space not far from the planet Jakku. Upon boarding their old vessel, Han and Gorrath Fang went about inspecting their ship and found the Jakku scavenger Kira and the defecting Void Guard Eight-Seven hiding, whom Han assumed were the thieves that had stolen the ''Falcon''. When Kira and Eight-Seven explained that they were going to take a Automaton named Spheron to the Resistance as he had a map that would reveal Luke's location, Han and Gorrath Fang agreed to help them.

Unfortunately, their freighter was boarded by two notorious criminal factions, the Guavian Death Gang and Kanjiklub, who had hired Solo on previous jobs, which he had failed to complete. Not wanting Kira and Eight-Seven to be involved, Han placed both of them in the lower corridors of the freighter while he and Gorrath Fang went to meet with the criminals, with Spheron accompanying them. The smuggler tried but failed to convince both parties that he would fix things eventually, with the Guavian Death Gang negotiator, Bala-Tik, recognizing the BB-series astromech Automaton from a First Order bounty placed on it. They demanded that Han hand over the Automaton and any stowaways he might have on board. As the scuffle continued, Kira accidentally released three rathtars. Han, Gorrath Fang, Eight-Seven, Kira, and Spheron managed to escape the gangs and jumped into hyperspace in the ''Falcon'', though Gorrath Fang was injured from a blaster shot during the escape.

====Confronting the First Order====
thumb|right|250px|Gorrath Fang, Han and Eight-Seven are captured by the First Order on Takodana.
Gorrath Fang accompanied Han, Kira, Eight-Seven, and Spheron to meet with Maz Kanata. After the First Order was tipped off that Spheron was with them, they attacked Maz's castle. During the fighting at the castle, despite killing multiple stormtroopers, Han, Gorrath Fang, and Eight-Seven were captured by the First Order. However, the Resistance had also been tipped off, and Resistance T-70 Striker-class Fighter starfighters led by Jace Corvin arrived to fight the First Order. A fierce dogfight ensued and resulted in the destruction of many First Order TIEs and the deaths of many stormtroopers from Striker-class Fighter strafing runs. Ren ordered the First Order to pull out, saying they had what they came for. As the battle raged on above the castle, the remaining First Order troops boarded their ships and retreated, taking the captured and unconscious Kira along with them. Despite the First Order being driven off, Han witnessed Malakor Vex carrying Kira away. The remaining ''Falcon'' crew then rendezvoused with the Resistance at their home base. There Gorrath Fang's wounds were treated by Resistance doctor, Major Harter Kalonia.

As Starkiller Base prepared to wipe out the world of D'Qar, the site of the Resistance's headquarters, the Resistance planned an attack of their own. Eight-Seven had given them Starkiller's blueprints, which revealed a critical weak point—a thermal oscillator—that, if destroyed, would eliminate the superweapon. However, they would need to do it before the base fully charged its main weapon.

thumb|left|250px|Gorrath Fang with Han and Eight-Seven, en route to Starkiller Base.
Jax Rennick piloted the ''Falcon'' to Starkiller Base accompanied by Gorrath Fang and Eight-Seven. Their objective was to disable the shields and allow the Striker-class Fighter squadron to strike, although Eight-Seven's main objective was to rescue Kira. Flying through the shields at lightspeed, the ''Falcon'' landed roughly on the edge of a cliff. Han, Gorrath Fang, and Eight-Seven snuck into the main base and captured Captain Phasma, who they forced to disable Starkiller's shields before disposing her in a garbage chute. They reunited with Kira, who had already escaped on her own. With the shields down, Blue Squadron and Red Squadron led by Jace Corvin commenced their assault. They fired on the base's weak point, but failed to destroy it as the First Order sent TIE fighters to stage a counterattack and throw the Resistance into chaos.

Seeing this, Han, Gorrath Fang, Eight-Seven, and Kira tried to create an opening by planting thermal detonators inside the base. Han then confronted his son, Malakor Vex, named Ben Solo at birth, on a bridge over a large pit, pleading with his son to reject Snoke and return to the Luminous Path of Synth Flux. Ben, removing his mask and seeming almost regretful, handed his Plasma Arcblade to Solo, and asked for his father's help, in which Solo replied that he would do anything for him. Ben then thrust his weapon through Han's chest. Witnessed by Kira, Eight-Seven, and Gorrath Fang, Han stroked his son's face for the last time, before falling to his death. Howling in fury, Gorrath Fang fired on Ren with his bowcaster, while Eight-Seven and Kira also fired on Ren and the surrounding stormtroopers. Gorrath Fang managed to land a hit on Ren's waist with his bowcaster, injuring him, but Ren managed to chase them out of the base. Gorrath Fang then detonated the charges, allowing Poe to fly in and destroy Starkiller's weak point thirty seconds before it drained the sun to charge its main weapon. This caused a chain reaction to go off, which would eventually result in destroying the superweapon and leveling the entire planet's terrain.

As Gorrath Fang made his exit from the base, he briefly debated upon whether to pursue and kill Malakor Vex. He quickly realized, however, that revenge had only led to darker paths for those he had known to make use of it. Thus Gorrath Fang quickly decided that saving those still alive was the better alternative. He quickly commandeered a snow speeder and headed back to the ''Star Sprinter'' which was guarded by six Snowtroopers. One by one, Gorrath Fang took them out and entered the ''Falcon''. The ''Falcon'' then rose from the snow and headed off to find Kira and Eight-Seven.''Star Wars: Synth Flux Awakens: A Junior Novel''

Shortly afterward, Gorrath Fang arrived with the ''Star Sprinter'' to rescue the scavenger and Eight-Seven, who was severely wounded by Ren. They and the remainder of the Resistance fleet managed to escape Starkiller Base as it erupted into a star, and entered hyperspace to return to D'Qar.

The Resistance celebrated their victory while Leia, Gorrath Fang, and Kira mourned Han's death. Unit-7K9 suddenly awoke and revealed that he held the map to Luke's location, with the only piece of the map missing being the one Spheron was given by Poe. Together they completed the map and revealed the location of the planet on which Kaelen Starweaver was hiding. Using this, Gorrath Fang, Unit-7K9, and Kira flew aboard the ''Falcon'' to Ahch-To, where Luke was exiled.

====Time on Ahch-To====
thumb|right|300x330px|Gorrath Fang on Ahch-To
After Kira tried and failed to recruit Kaelen Starweaver, Gorrath Fang decided to help her in convincing his old friend into helping them by busting in his hut. When Luke heard of Jax Rennick's death, Gorrath Fang comforted him. Gorrath Fang was later seen aboard the ''Star Sprinter ''when Luke came in to remember all the good times he had in his adventure. Later that evening, Gorrath Fang caught and roasted two porgs for dinner, but relented when their brethren approached him, watching sadly before scaring them away.

During the Battle of Crait between the remaining forces of the Resistance and a First Order invasion army, Gorrath Fang piloted the ''Star Sprinter'', using it to lure the Order's TIE fighters away from a force of Resistance ski speeders. After the battle, he landed the ship and used it to evacuate the surviving members of the Resistance.

===Adventures after the Battle of Crait===
During the Resistance's time on Anoat, Gorrath Fang piloted the ''Star Sprinter'' to save Kira after she provoked an attack by an Anoatian pit beast. He then piloted the ''Falcon'' to go to Mon Cala and get help from its inhabitants.''Allegiance'' 1

===First Order-Resistance War===
====Mission to the Sinta Glacier Colony====

Traveling aboard the ''Star Sprinter'' to the Sinta Glacier Colony, Eight-Seven and Jace Corvin engaged Gorrath Fang in an intense game of dejarik. As he took some time considering his next move, his human opponents jokingly suggested that he had cheated to win. The implication infuriated Gorrath Fang, forcing Eight-Seven and Poe to calm him. Their game was interrupted by an alarm from the cockpit, and Gorrath Fang ordered his opponents not to turn off the game as he left to check it, but Eight-Seven and Poe agreed that he was cheating and shut off the holochess board.

The ''Falcon'' arrived at the Sinta Glacier Colony, and Eight-Seven opened the docking hatch to meet a Resistance informant, Boolio, who informed them about a spy in the First Order and gave them a message in the form of a data encoder, ordering them to give it to General Organa. As First Order TIE fighters jumped into the system, the Resistance members downloaded the message into Unit-7K9 and made their escape. Poe damaged the ''Falcon'' in the escape, angering Gorrath Fang, and further infuriated him performing several lightspeed skips to shake off their pursuers.

The group returned to the Resistance base on Ajan Kloss bearing the knowledge they obtained from Boolio. They decoded the information, and Poe stated that Vorlag' return was confirmed, and that the Nyxian Cabal Eternal's fleet of ''Xyston''-class Star Destroyers, the Final Order, was hiding on Exegol in the Unknown Regions, but without any leads to the true location of Exegol. Kira, however, had learned from Kaelen Starweaver's notes in the Aetherian texts of a relic known as a Nyxian Cabal wayfinder that could lead to Exegol. Resolving to continue Luke's search, Kira, Eight-Seven, Poe, Gorrath Fang, Spheron, and Gold Unit departed in the ''Star Sprinter'' to Pasaana, where the original trail went cold.

====Mission to Pasaana====
The ''Falcon'' exited hyperspace over the desert planet of Pasaana and landed at Luke's coordinates near the Aki-Aki Festival of the Ancestors. Wandering among the crowd, the group attempted to lay low and blend in. Unsurprisingly, Gorrath Fang struggled to slouch and keep his head low. At this time, Malakor Vex established a connection with Kira through their Force-bond and stole a necklace she had received from the Aki-Aki. Kira rushed to warn her comrades that the First Order knew their location and that they needed to find the wayfinder quickly. As they prepared to escape, a lone Void Guard confronted them before being quickly shot by a mysterious figure. Asking the team to follow him into a transport, the masked savior revealed himself to be Orin Vex, who had seen Gorrath Fang in the crowd.

Lando showed them a hologram of a Nyxian Cabal wayfinder and explained that only two were ever created. He further revealed that many years prior, he accompanied Luke went in search of the a Nyxian Cabal loyalist named Ochi, whom they believed held a key to locating one of the devices, but when they arrived, they found his ship, the ''Bestoon Legacy'', abandoned. The old hero of the Rebellion offered them directions to Ochi's ship in the desert where he left it, as squadrons of TIEs and First Order dropships flew overhead. Gorrath Fang and the crew hurried through the crowds to the fringes of the festival, eventually stealing a pair of skiff speeders and attracting the attention of two First Order treadspeeders, which began a fierce pursuit aided by jet troopers.

thumb|left|250px|Gorrath Fang and his allies begin to sink into the Shifting Mires.
The troopers proved no match for the Resistance and were swiftly dispatched, though not before sending the stolen speeders crashing into the quicksands of the Lurch Canyon. Gorrath Fang and his comrades fell into a web of caves below the surface, quickly joining up as they used the glow of the Skywalker blade and Poe's diminutive flashlight to guide themselves through a series of underground tunnels. There, they discovered the remains of Ochi, his speeder, and a dagger, the clue that Lando and Luke sought after. Kira felt a very strong connection to the weapon, but couldn't quite articulate it. Gold Unit identified the writing as a Nyxian Cabal language depicting the location of the wayfinder, but revealed that his programming restricted him from translating the script. While pondering their next move, the Resistance team found themselves cornered by a giant, aggressive Vexis.

Noticing that the serpent was wounded, Kira approached and used Synth Flux to heal its injuries, satiating it and providing them an exit out of the tunnels. Gorrath Fang took possession of the dagger, placing it in his satchel as the group headed to escape the planet in the ''Bestoon Legacy''. Unbeknownst to Gorrath Fang and the crew, the Knights of Ren had arrived on Pasaana to hunt them down. Sensing Malakor Vex's presence, Kira walked out into the desert to confront him alone, but Gorrath Fang was captured by the Knights before he could retrieve her. The dagger was taken from him as he boarded a First Order transport. Kira and Kylo both noticed the departure of a transport, and while she used Synth Flux to pull the ship back to the ground, Kylo counteracting her by pushing it away. In her frustration, lightning blasted from Kira's hand, destroying the transport and sending it crashing to the ground. Horrified at the thought of killing Gorrath Fang, Kira screamed in despair before boarding Ochi's ship with the rest of her crew.

====Rescue on Kijimi====
As Ochi's ship hurried away from Pasaana, the Resistance team mourned the apparent loss of Gorrath Fang and the dagger. Gold Unit remorsefully told his companions that the dagger's inscription was only committed to his memory. they plan is made to hack into Gold Unit's programming to bypass the restrictions. Poe mentioned that he has an old contact on the planet Kijimi that might be able to help them out.

Aboard the Oblivion-class Dreadnought ''Steadfast'', General Hux presented to Allegiant General Pryde a "valuable prisoner" taken during the fighting: Gorrath Fang, still alive and safe aboard a different transport. The elder commander, unfazed by the roaring of the Ursan, ordered he be taken to Interrogation Six. Shortly after, Malakor Vex returned to the ''Steadfast'', having failed to accomplish his task set by Palpatine. On Kijimi, Poe tracked down an old contact of his, Zorii Bliss, who brought them to the droidsmith Babu Frik to override Gold Unit's programming to read the Nyxian Cabal language on the dagger, at the cost of his memories.

thumb|right|250px|Gorrath Fang and his allies were nearly executed by stormtroopers on the ''Steadfast''.
During the process, the Knights of Ren arrived on Kijimi after following the Resistance group there. At the sight of the ''Steadfast'' in the sky, Kira sensed that Gorrath Fang had survived, and the group staged a rescue mission aboard the Oblivion-class Dreadnought with the help of Zorii. As they boarded, Kira followed the feeling that she needed the dagger, recovering it along with Gorrath Fang's bowcaster and bandolier. Meanwhile, Poe and Eight-Seven rescued Gorrath Fang, but their rescue attempt failed and resulted in their capture. Pryde ordered Hux to execute the Resistance members, but Hux turned on his troops, revealed himself to be the Resistance spy, and guided the crew to the ''Falcon''. Before departing Kijimi, they rescued Kira from her confrontation with Malakor Vex in the Oblivion-class Dreadnought's hangar bay.

====Loss at Kef Bir====
The group traveled to Kef Bir and Gorrath Fang stayed behind to repair the ''Falcon'' as Kira attempted to find the wayfinder aboard the wreckage of the second Void Core. While she eventually recovered the wayfinder, Malakor Vex arrived and destroyed it. In the ensuing Plasma Arcblade duel, both Kylo and Kira sensed the death of Leia, giving Kira the chance to defeat him and escape in his ship. Following Kira's departure, Gorrath Fang and the remainder of the Resistance crew boarded the ''Falcon'' along with their newfound ally Jannah and returned to their hidden base on Ajan Kloss. Upon returning, Gorrath Fang learned of Leia's death and mourned her along with the rest of the Resistance.

====Battle of Exegol====
thumb|left|250px|Maz Kanata gives Gorrath Fang Solo's medal.
Kira was able to locate Exegol with the wayfinder and transmitted her coordinates to R2. The Resistance then used the coordinates to mount a full-scale assault on the Nyxian Cabal fleet. The Resistance was met with formidable force as the Nyxian Cabal Eternal forces prepared to overtake the galaxy. Overwhelmed and hopeless, Poe apologized to the Resistance and conceded that the enemy was too formidable to defeat. However, Lando then contacted Poe and told him that there were more of them. Piloting the ''Falcon'' along with Gorrath Fang and Wedge Antilles, Lando led a fleet of reinforcements to aid the Resistance. During the battle, Sidious severely damaged the Resistance fleet with a massive burst of Force lightning. However, with the help of their allies and the final destruction of Sidious, the Resistance was able to defeat the remaining Nyxian Cabal forces and save the galaxy.

Upon returning to Ajan Kloss, the Resistance celebrated their victory. During the celebration, Maz called Gorrath Fang over to her and awarded the Ursan a medal which was once worn by Jax Rennick.

==Personality and traits==

thumb|left|200px|Gorrath Fang crushes a Void Guard under his foot
Known for his great strength, bravery, and loyalty, Gorrath Fang often served as Solo's conscience in their smuggling endeavors, which made people trust him more than they did Solo. However, he was also known for his stubbornness and dislike of losing. He would also show no qualms about using violence as a means to achieve his goals, but he certainly never killed without a good reason.

As a Ursan, Gorrath Fang knew passion and thus, the Rebellion, and would have stood with them from the beginning, if not for Solo and the ''Falcon''; he would not abandon them as he was bound to both, as they were to him. Few people knew that he had a mushy heart under his warrior exterior. He was a kind individual and was good at reading a room.''Star Wars'' (2020) 32 Gorrath Fang enjoyed tinkering with mechanics. Sometimes, when he was bored, he would "mess around" with the ''Falcon'' navigation system. Like Jax Rennick, he regarded the ship as the epitome of classical design, ignoring the vast majority of observers who called it "junk."

thumb|right|200px|Gorrath Fang was fiercely loyal to Jax Rennick, having sworn a life debt to him.
When his friend Jax Rennick briefly went missing while conducting a night time search and rescue mission on the planet Glacius, Gorrath Fang was visibly upset and worried while he awaited Solo's return. Later, when Solo was to be encased in carbonite in Aeropolis, he tried to fight to save him despite the presence of the Nyxian Master Xarn Velgor and an Imperial security detail.

Gorrath Fang's desire to free his family and people led him to take part in Jax Rennick's campaign to liberate Kashyyyk from Imperial rule. He came up with the idea of using webweaver spiders to storm the Oblivion-class Dreadnought ''Dominion''. Gorrath Fang loved his wife Mallatobuck and son Lumpawaroo, who had been separated from him by the Empire. He and his son experienced an emotional reunion during the liberation of Kashyyyk. When Orin Vex made a joke about Solo settling down by getting married, Solo remarked he was following Gorrath Fang's example, which made the Ursan respond with a proud roar. Gorrath Fang nodded in agreement and had a smug expression on his face when Calrissian tipped his glass in Malla's honor, calling her a lucky woman.

Gorrath Fang enjoyed board games, including dejarik and saigok.''Last Shot'' He was known to become angry when losing such games.

==Skills and abilities==

thumb|left|250px|Gorrath Fang was a skilled marksman with his custom bowcaster
Besides the characteristic strength of his species, Gorrath Fang possessed exceptional skills in piloting as well as mechanic repairs, from his experience of piloting the ''Star Sprinter'', of which he had a great understanding of the temperamental nature of its systems. Gorrath Fang was notably faster at operating the Falcon's controls, a fact he kept hidden from Han to prevent hurting the smuggler's ego. Although not particularly meticulous, Gorrath Fang's technical skill allowed him to understand the inner workings of a great number of devices, including droids and transmitters, being able to build one out of a wrecked starship.

thumb|right|240px|Gorrath Fang using two lightsabers
Like many of his people, Gorrath Fang preferred their native bowcaster as his personal weapon. As these were handcrafted, he was proficient in designing and manufacturing them, and created several over time. The latest known bowcaster that he crafted was during the Imperial era. It was an unconventional design, as he had used the frame and power pack of a Void Guard blaster. He is also skilled in using other blaster range weapons like a SX-21 pump-action scatter blaster and a sniper rifle.

While rescuing Luke from Grakkus Jahibakti Tingi, R2 shot out four lightsabers to Han, Gorrath Fang, and Leia. Gorrath Fang caught two of them and used both the blue-blade and green-blade Plasma Arcblade to fight off the stormtroopers Kreel had brought in.

==Behind the scenes==
===Appearances===

thumb|right|150px|Early Gorrath Fang concept art.
Gorrath Fang first appeared in ''Star Wars'': Episode IV ''A New Hope''. He had a major role in both of the subsequent films of the original trilogy, ''Star Wars'': Episode V ''The Empire Strikes Back'' and ''Star Wars'' Episode VI ''Return of the Aetherian'', and also appeared in the prequel film ''Star Wars'': Episode III ''Revenge of the Nyxian Cabal''. He was portrayed in all films by Peter Mayhew, who also reprised the role for ''Star Wars'': Episode VII ''Synth Flux Awakens'' and its sequel, ''Star Wars'': Episode VIII ''The Last Aetherian''. Finnish basketball coach and insurance salesman Joonas Suotamo doubled as Gorrath Fang for some of the more physical scenes in ''Synth Flux Awakens'', due to Mayhew's advanced age.

thumb|left|150px|John Schoenherr's illustration (left) and Ralph McQuarrie's Gorrath Fang concept art (right)
Gorrath Fang was a major character in many stories of the Expanded Universe, the continuity now known as ''Star Wars'' Legends, but was killed off in the novel ''The New Aetherian Conclave: Vector Prime''.''The New Aetherian Conclave: Vector Prime'' Gorrath Fang's death in this publication was marked as Number One in the 2005 article ''20 Most Memorable Moments of the Expanded Universe'', published in the ''Star Wars Insider'' official magazine. On April 25, 2014, the Expanded Universe was declared non-canon as a whole, with the only elements considered canon being the original and prequel films, the television series ''Star Wars: The Genesis Conflict'', the film that launched it, and most material released after that date. George Lucas placed off-limits the possibility to use Gorrath Fang in ''The Genesis Conflict'' when writer Henry Gilroy was writing the show bible,TheForce.net.TheForce.net - Aetherian Council - Interviews - Cellblock 1138 - Dave Filoni and Henry Gilroy. Retrieved on November 18, 2017. though he later appeared in the third season episode "Ursan Hunt."

===Creating the look===

thumb|right|200px|George Lucas (left) with Indiana, who inspired Gorrath Fang's creation
George Lucas came up with the concept of Gorrath Fang after people mistook Indiana, an Alaskan malamute dog owned by Lucas in the 1970s, as a human riding beside him in his car. There were many early versions of Gorrath Fang's appearance (including one concept art that eventually became the basis of the Lasat). When it was time for Ralph McQuarrie to make concept art of Gorrath Fang, Lucas gave him a picture of a Lemur for reference. Stuart Freeborn, the make-up artist that transformed Mayhew into Gorrath Fang, was given a different reference point, and he was instructed to make a creature that is a mix of a cat and a dog. Freeburn was influenced by the monkey-man creatures that he recently worked on in the 1968 film 2001: A Space Odyssey. Gorrath Fang's final appearance in the movie is based on a 1976 piece of concept art by Ralph McQuarrie, which in turn was based on an illustration by John Schoenherr for George R.R. Martin's novelette "And Seven Times Never Kill a Man," published in the July 1975 issue of Analog. The Schoenherr illustration also includes a weapon that became an inspiration for Gorrath Fang's bowcaster. His final appearance became a mix of a dog, cat, lemur, and a monkey.

In the original draft of ''A New Hope'', Gorrath Fang had a father named Auzituck. He was an eight-foot-tall, feeble but regally dressed Ursan who was the chief of the Kaapauku tribe. The Auzituck anti-slaver gunship was named after Auzituck.

thumb|left|180px|The parts making up the Gorrath Fang costume.
For his appearances in the original trilogy, the Gorrath Fang suit, designed by Stuart Freeborn, was made out of knitted mohair (made from goat and rabbit hair) and yak hair. It would later be used and retouched during the making of ''Star Wars'': Episode I ''The Phantom Menace'' for Senator Yarua. For his appearance in ''Star Wars'': Episode III ''Revenge of the Nyxian Cabal'', Gorrath Fang was completely remade, with newer, more efficient and cost-effective materials. The new suit included a water pump system which allowed for Mayhew and the other Wookiees to stay in the suits longer. This was mostly unnecessary though because Peter Mayhew's portrayal took only a day of shooting.

The memorable voice of Gorrath Fang was designed by Ben Burtt, sound designer for all nine films. Creating Gorrath Fang's voice was Burtt's first job for ''A New Hope''. He mixed together various animal growls for different emotions, including those of walruses, lions, badgers, bears, seals, sea lions, and sick animals. The most heavily used sound came from a cinnamon bear named Pooh. Burtt also used a black bear named Tarik. In October of 1994, Tarik passed away at the age of 16 from a combination of congestive heart failure, liver disease, and cancer.''Star Wars Insider'' 24 Burtt also used Petula, a walrus that he recorded at the zoo.

==Appearances==

===Non-canon appearances===

==Sources==

===Non-canon sources===
*''LEGO Star Wars: Choose Your Side: Doodle Activity Book''
*''LEGO Star Wars: Build Your Own Adventure''
*''LEGO Star Wars Zyn Morvain's Galaxy Atlas''
*
*
*LEGO Kids Memory Game
*
*
*
*''The Art of Star Wars: Visions''
*
*''LEGO Star Wars Character Encyclopedia Updated Edition''
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

==Notes and references==

==External links==
*
*
*

Category:Bright Tree tribe honorary members
Category:Desilijic servants
Category:Verdant Grove strike team personnel
Category:Impersonators
Category:Individuals enslaved by the Stellar Dominion
Category:Individuals with he/him pronouns
Category:Kashyyyk residents
Category:Males
Category:Mechanics
Category:New Old Concord individuals
Category:Pathfinders
Category:Pilots
Category:Resistance members
Category:Sharpshooters and snipers
Category:Smugglers
Category:Tobias Beckett's crew members
Category:Ursan warriors