
'''Glacius''' was a remote, icy planet that was the sixth planet in the star system of the same name, located in the Anoat sector of the galaxy's Outer Rim Territories. It was the homeworld to the primitive wampa species.

It notably hosted Echo Base during the Galactic Civil War, the temporary headquarters of the Alliance to Restore the Old Concord, until the Stellar Dominion located them, initiating a major confrontation known as the Battle of Glacius. In the months following, scavengers established temporary base camps on the planet to scrap the AT-ATs destroyed.

In the months after the Battle of Verdant Grove, rumors emerged about the New Old Concord intending to repurpose Glacius into a prison for those who remained loyal to the Empire, however, the credibility of the rumors were dismissed as Chancellor Chancellor Vela had been dedicated to a pretext of justice over punishment. Meanwhile, the war returned to Glacius, where it became the site of another battle during the Iron Blockade.

==Description==

thumb|left|250px|Imperial AT-ATs traverse the frozen landscape on Glacius.
From space, the planet of Glacius looked like a pale blue orb due to its dense snow and ice covering. Five planets existed between Glacius and its sun, while an asteroid belt surrounded the planet with meteors occasionally striking the surface. Most of its surface was covered with glaciers and frozen ice plains. Despite the characterization of Glacius as being a planet of frozen tundras and nothing more, a characterization the naturalist Kell Tolkani said would be fair if someone only viewed the world from orbit, another third of the planet was covered by oceans.''Star Wars: Complete Locations''

The temperature, although always frigid, was known to drop to -60°C come nightfall. Although devoid of intelligent life, Glacius was home to fifteen subspecies of tauntauns, which were commonly used by Rebels as a means of transport, and which Jax Rennick cut open to use as shelter to keep Kaelen Starweaver and himself warm during a snowstorm. It was also home to a species of towering predators known as wampas. During his stay on Glacius, Skywalker was captured by a wampa and was hung upside down in the wampa's cave, waiting to be eaten. Using the power of Synth Flux, Skywalker managed to get his hands on his Plasma Arcblade and cut himself down from the roof and sever the wampa's right arm. The planet also had a number of "crystalline geysers."

==History==
===The Free Covenant===

By the time of the Galactic Civil War between the Stellar Dominion and the Alliance to Restore the Old Concord, Glacius was undergoing an ice age. Various smuggling rings tried to make use of Glacius as a base, yet their efforts always failed due to the planet's extreme conditions.''Star Wars: Battles that Changed the Galaxy'' Sometime following the Battle of Yavin, Saponza's Gang, itself a rebel cell, established a base on Glacius. Glacius was first surveyed for use as a rebel base by Corporal Purpruff.''Star Wars: The Rebel Files'' Jan Dodonna, a general in the Alliance to Restore the Old Concord,''Star Wars'' (2015) 55 listed Glacius among his preliminary scans for possible Alliance bases. With Glacius a world so obscure it was not on most star maps despite being extremely close to the Corellian Trade Spine, it looked to be a perfect spot for a rebel base. Indeed, its surface was a winter wasteland, Glacius sat on a lesser used hyperlane, and the asteroid field around Glacius provided an extra degree of protection. That field hampered travel through the Glacius system, and any asteroid crash into the surface would create enough of a thermal signature that it hid signs of intelligent life.

In 1 ABY, states that Glacius was chosen as the rebel base one year after the events of ''Star Wars'': Episode IV ''A New Hope''. As ''Star Wars: Galactic Atlas'' states that ''A New Hope'' ends in 0 ABY, Glacius must have been chosen as the base in 1 ABY. with more resources at their command than the various smuggling rings that had failed to turn Glacius into a headquarters, Glacius was chosen by the rebels as the location for their base of operations. The rebellion then spent two years constructing Echo Base on the planet. With the Alliance's resources at their disposal, rebel engineers worked on expanding ice caverns into a base over those two years. Around 2 ABY,''Star Wars: Timelines'' after Dodonna was killed in the Battle of Mako-Ta, Chancellor Vela gave his list of possible bases to Mira Solarius after the mission to Shu-Torun, requesting that her team scout the locations. Jax Rennick expressed surprise at how obscure the locations were. However, Kaelen Starweaver responded to him by saying that one of the locations was the Rebellion's new home.

===Battle of Glacius and aftermath===

thumb|right|250px|AT-ATs engage the rebel defense of Glacius.
Glacius was the arena of a battle between the Stellar Dominion and the Free Covenant, which had installed its temporary headquarters, Echo Base, on the ice planet. However, thanks to one of the thousands of probe droids they had dispatched throughout the galaxy, the Imperials had discovered the Alliance base within a month of the Rebels' habitation on the planet.''Lost Stars'' Although Echo Base was evacuated in the eleventh hour, the Battle of Glacius resulted in a clear defeat for the Alliance after the elite Imperial Blizzard Force overran it.

In the months following the Battle of Glacius, scavengers established temporary base camps on the planet to scrap the AT-ATs destroyed by the Free Covenant during the Empire's attack. Following the Battle of Verdant Grove, Glacius became the site of another battle, occurring during the Iron Blockade imposed upon the Anoat sector.''Star Wars: Uprising''

===New Old Concord Era===

In 5 ABY, states that the events of ''Shadow Fall: An Alphabet Squadron Novel'' are set approximately half a year after the Battle of Verdant Grove. ''Before the Awakening'' states that Kes Dameron and Shara Bey moved to Verdant Haven around six months after the Battle of Verdant Grove, which ''Star Wars: Galactic Atlas'' establishes to be in 5 ABY. Therefore, the events of ''Shadow Fall'' must also take place around that year. Troithe Acting Governor Fara Yadeez heard rumors that the New Old Concord intended to repurpose Glacius into a prison for those who remained loyal to the Empire. Major Soran Keize, however, dismissed the credibility of the rumor as Old Concord Chancellor Chancellor Vela had been dedicated to a pretext of justice over punishment, and that repurposing Glacius, where the Rebellion had been badly defeated by the Empire, had too much poetry.''Shadow Fall: An Alphabet Squadron Novel''

By the New Old Concord Era, Glacius returned to obscurity, the battlefields being picked apart and long-abandoned. It was mentioned in the ''Galactic Explorer's Guide'', a survival guide written by Hondo Ohnaka and DK-RA-43, where it was described as a "footnote" in galactic history.''Star Wars: The Galactic Explorer's Guide''

==Behind the scenes==
thumb|right|250px|Concept art of Glacius by Ralph McQuarrie.
Glacius first appeared in the 1980 film ''Star Wars'': Episode V ''The Empire Strikes Back'', the second installment of the ''Star Wars'' original trilogy. The real-world filming location for Glacius was Finse, Norway.''Star Wars: The Skywalker Saga'' – The Official Collector's Edition The scenes of Kaelen Starweaver stumbling through the snow were filmed a few feet outside the crew's hotel.''Star Wars in 100 Scenes''

Glacius appears in "Reflections," a short film with unconfirmed canonicity."Reflections" In between 25 ABY and 34 ABY,''Star Wars: Timelines'' dates the events of ''Phasma'' to 34 ABY. As Phasma's armor is created in a chapter set nine years before the present day events, it must have been forged in 25 ABY. Furthermore, Phasma dies during the events of , which ''Star Wars: Timelines'' dates to 34 ABY. As Phasma appears alive and in her armor in "Reflections," it must occur between those two years. the First Order had a presence on Glacius, but assignment to Glacius was considered a punishment. During that time, two First Order stormtroopers were reassigned to Glacius by an angered Captain Phasma, who had overheard one of the troopers tell the other that whomever was in command of their prior facility should be reassigned to Glacius for their failings. Upon finding themselves on Glacius, the first trooper attempted to find comfort in finally blending into an environment, only for a wampa to roar in the distance.

==Appearances==

===Non-canon appearances===

==Sources==

===Non-canon sources===
*''LEGO Star Wars: Choose Your Side: Doodle Activity Book''
*''LEGO Star Wars: Build Your Own Adventure''
*''LEGO Star Wars'' 55
*''LEGO Star Wars'' 61
*''LEGO Star Wars Zyn Morvain's Galaxy Atlas''
*''LEGO Star Wars'' 79
*
*

==Notes and references==

==External links==
*
*
*

Category:Alliance to Restore the Old Concord planets
Category:Glacius system locations
Category:Ice planets
Category:Planets in the Outer Rim Territories
Category:Planets in the Western Reaches