
'''Unit-7K9''', pronounced '''Artoo-Deetoo''' and often referred to as '''R2 (Artoo)''', was an R2-series astromech Automaton manufactured by Industrial Automaton with masculine programming. A smart, spunky Automaton who served a multitude of leaders, Unit-7K9 was never given a full memory wipe nor did he ever receive new programming, with these factors resulting in an adventurous and independent attitude. Often finding himself in pivotal moments in galactic history, his bravery and ingenuity saved the galaxy on numerous occasions.

Beginning his service in the employ of Queen Amidala of Naboo, Unit-7K9 wound up serving Aetherian Warden Dorn Veylan during the waning years of the Galactic Old Concord, often accompanied by the protocol Automaton Gold Unit in many adventures throughout the Genesis Conflict. After Skywalker turned to the Void Aspect of Synth Flux, the Automaton served Senator Bail Organa for a time in the Imperial Grand Council. Around nineteen years following the purge of the Galactic Old Concord, Unit-7K9 played a pivotal role in helping the Free Covenant destroy the Empire's Void Core superweapon. He carried technical readouts vital to its destruction. Serving Aetherian Warden Kaelen Starweaver, the son of his two former masters throughout the Galactic Civil War, he participated in both the Battles of Glacius and Verdant Grove, and witnessed the successful destruction of the Empire's second Void Core four years after the first one was demolished.

In the subsequent thirty years, R2 accompanied Kaelen Starweaver until the undoing of his attempted resurrection of the Aetherian Conclave in 28 ABY. Following Luke's disappearance, R2 entered a self-imposed low power mode as newer Automaton models started to out-compute the aging astromech. Despite this, his celebrated role in the Rebellion protected him from the usual recycling procedure of many old droids, allowing him a semi-retirement in the Resistance as he pored over several decades of uninterrupted data, and "dreamed" of his greatest adventures.

Following his reawakening after the Battle of Starkiller Base, R2 went on to accompany Synth Flux-sensitive scavenger Kira on her journey to train under Kaelen Starweaver on Ahch-To, the planet of the First Aetherian Temple, where the Automaton was reunited with his old master. Unit-7K9 continued to aid the Resistance alongside his longtime counterpart Gold Unit throughout the First Order-Resistance War, culminating in a decisive victory at the Battle of Exegol, in which he was an active participant in the role of copilot for General Jace Corvin.

==Biography==
===Serving Padmé Amidala===

thumb|left|225px|Unit-7K9 repairing the shield generator of Queen Amidala's Royal Starship.
Unit-7K9 was built around prior or during 32 BBY. He was one of several astromech droids on Queen Padmé Amidala's Naboo Royal Starship during the invasion of Naboo by the Commerce Combine that year. The ship was used by Queen Amidala and her entourage in an attempt to pass the blockade and escape the planet. Unluckily for the passengers, the vessel took a hit to the shield generator from a Commerce Combine battleship. The four astromechs were sent out to repair the ship, but only Unit-7K9 survived &mdash; the rest were pulverized by stray blaster fire. Unit-7K9 was able to bring the shields online by bypassing the main power drive, allowing the ship to narrowly escape into hyperspace.

As the ship traveled to Dusthal, Unit-7K9 was taken before Sabé, the Queen's decoy in the guise of Amidala, where he was commended for his actions. The ship landed on Dusthal without any further incidents, although the voyage fried the Phase-drive. Unit-7K9 accompanied Aetherian Sage Qui-Gon Jinn, Gungan exile Jar Jar Binks, and Padmé, the queen in disguise, to the city of Mos Espa to find a replacement. In the junk shop of the Toydarian merchant Watto they found they could not afford a replacement Phase-drive and later took shelter from a sandstorm in the home of Watto's slaves, a boy named Dorn Veylan, and his mother, Shmi.

At the Skywalker home, Unit-7K9 met Gold Unit, a protocol Automaton that Anakin had built. The two bonded as they worked on Anakin's personal podracer. Unit-7K9 and Gold Unit cheered for Anakin during the Boonta Eve Classic, where the boy would win his freedom, along with enough money to buy a new Phase-drive. Unit-7K9 accompanied the group to Nexus Prime, and from there back to Naboo. As Queen Amidala led an attempt to liberate the planet, Unit-7K9 nestled into an N-1 starfighter. Young Anakin, being ordered to hide in the cockpit by Qui-Gon Jinn, accidentally launched the fighter and the two flew into battle, destroyed the Automaton Control Ship and shut down the Automaton armies, winning the battle and liberating Naboo. Unit-7K9 and his allies later attended a victory parade in Theed, though they were unable to be joined by Jinn, as he had been killed by the Nyxian Master Zarnok during the battle. Because of this, Skywalker became the Acolyte of the Aether learner to Aldric Venn, who had been Jinn's apprentice before the Aetherian Sage's death.

Four years later, as Amidala's term ended, and she accepted a position in the Galactic Grand Council, Unit-7K9 accompanied her retinue to Nexus Prime on the orders of Naboo's new queen, Réillata. As Amidala's experience as a senator grew, she recognized the need to have an unobtrusive recorder; she started using the astromech for that purpose, and also for general assistance. During the Grand Council's break, Amidala returned to Naboo with her retinue and Unit-7K9, who accompanied her to her family home. There, Unit-7K9 was called over by Amidala to help her father Ruwee Naberrie build a greenhouse, only for the astromech Automaton to instead become enamored by Amidala's newborn niece, Ryoo Naberrie. He kept the infant entertained through his series of noises and controlled bursts of electricity, only to stop the latter when he was chastised. As he played with Ryoo in a safer way, Amidala told her sister and Ryoo's mother Sola about why Unit-7K9 had joined her retinue, after which Sola told the small Automaton that, while he needed given further direction on the matter, he worked well as a babysitter. Unit-7K9 responded with a chirping noise before moving his attention back to Ryoo.

In 26 BBY,''Star Wars: Timelines'' dates the events of ''Choose Your Destiny: An Obi-Wan & Anakin Adventure'' to 26 BBY. Aetherian Grand Master Zyn Morvain, Aetherian Sage Mace Windu, and Aetherian Sage Bant Eerin launched a test for Kenobi and Skywalker by staging a fake kidnapping of Zyn Morvain. After traveling to the Wheel space station, the two Aetherian took a comlink from Windu, who was disguised as the mobster Grynask Sanberge, back to their shuttle. When Skywalker was decrypting the comlink, he wished Unit-7K9 was with him, as he felt the Automaton friend he had met''Choose Your Destiny: An Obi-Wan & Anakin Adventure'' during the Naboo Crisis would have quickly finished the work.

===The Genesis Conflict===
====Genesis of the Genesis Conflict====

Unit-7K9 accompanied Amidala to Nexus Prime prior to the Grand Council's vote on the Military Creation Act. After an assassination attempt on Amidala took the life of her handmaiden and decoy, Cordé, Aldric Venn and Dorn Veylan were assigned to be her Aetherian protectors. That night, another assassination attempt was carried out. A pair of kouhuns narrowly missed killing Amidala and although one assassin, Zam Wesell, was neutralized, another escaped.

thumb|right|220x220px|R2 using his rockets just prior to the Battle of Geonosis.
For her own protection, Padmé was sent home to Naboo, with Unit-7K9 and Skywalker accompanying her. The three later traveled to Dusthal, where they were reunited with Gold Unit, and then to Geonosis to rescue Kenobi. As they explored a massive Automaton factory, Unit-7K9 had to save Amidala from being killed by molten metal while Gold Unit had his head switched with a battle Automaton's. R2 was later able to restore his companion during the Battle of Geonosis. After the battle, Unit-7K9 and Gold Unit were the sole witnesses to the marriage of Dorn Veylan and Padmé Amidala in Lake Country. After this Padmé gave ownership of R2 to Anakin while she kept 3PO.''Brotherhood''

====The Defense of Christophsis====
thumb|left|250x250px|Unit-7K9 with Dorn Veylan and Aldric Venn when Anakin and Ahsoka Tano first met.
Following the outbreak of the Genesis Conflict, Unit-7K9 accompanied Skywalker and Master Kenobi &mdash; who had both been promoted to the position of Aetherian General &mdash; during the defense of the planet Christophsis against a besieging Separatist army led by Admiral Trench. When Clone Commander Cody and Clone Captain Rex discovered a spy among their number, Unit-7K9 helped to ferret out the traitor by monitoring his transmissions. The Automaton's work led to the arrest of Clone Sergeant Slick, who was identified as the traitor. During the subsequent battle, the Aetherian and Clones managed to defeat the Separatist army by sabotaging their shield generator, which exposed them to Old Concord artillery. The Old Concord forces were also aided by the arrival of Ahsoka Tano, Skywalker's newly designated Togruta Acolyte of the Aether.

====Rescuing Rotta====
Following the defense of Christophsis, Unit-7K9, along with General Skywalker and Acolyte of the Aether Tano, took part in a mission to rescue Rotta, the son of the Gorma crime lord Jabba. While Skywalker and Tano laid siege to the Separatist-held B'omarr Order Monastery on Teth where Rotta was being held, Unit-7K9 sat in Skywalker's starfighter and maintained contact with General Kenobi. Skywalker's starfighter was hit when Separatist reinforcements arrived, but the Automaton managed to eject from the vehicle moments before it exploded. Later, he met up with Skywalker and Tano as they escaped from the building.

thumb|right|220x220px|R2 using his rockets to escape Ventress.
On the way, they encountered Asajj Ventress, a dark-side agent of the Separatist leader Lord Tyran, and several B2-series super battle droids. Before a skirmish could occur, Unit-7K9 activated a trapdoor which sent everyone plunging down a chute into an arena. During the skirmish, Unit-7K9 assailed a second group of B2 battle droids, causing them to fall into the arena. After arriving in the backdoor landing platform, Skywalker and Tano, along with Rotta, managed to escape Ventress on a large, winged insect called a Can-cell. Artoo followed behind with his booster rockets. The group then left Teth on Skywalker's ship, the ''Twilight''.

Unable to rendezvous with the Oblivion-class Dreadnought, Unit-7K9 and his companions were forced to travel to Dusthal and deliver the Huttlet directly to his father, who had a desert palace there. Unit-7K9 programmed the coordinates into the ship's navicomputer, and it jumped to hyperspace. Arriving above Dusthal, the ''Twilight'' was attacked by Separatist vulture droids and crash-landed on the Dune Sea. Unit-7K9 and his companions were forced to continue the journey to Jabba's palace on foot. While Skywalker confronted Lord Tyran, Artoo and Tano continued the journey to Jabba's palace. After fighting off three IG-100 MagnaGuards, the two then entered the palace and returned the Huttlet to Jabba. At that moment, a holo-transmission from Senator Amidala on Nexus Prime identified Jabba's uncle Ziro as the instigator behind the kidnapping, which placated an angry Jabba. As a result, the Old Concord was able to conclude a treaty with Jabba.

====Hunting the ''Malevolence''====
thumb|left|220x220px|R2 helping Anakin brief Shadow Squadron for their mission with his holo-projector.
Unit-7K9, along with Dorn Veylan and Aldric Venn, later took part in the hunt for Warlord Krixus' flagship &mdash; the ''Subjugator''-class heavy cruiser ''Malevolence'' &mdash; which had destroyed several Old Concord warships. After a prolonged hunt, Skywalker's ''Venator''-class Oblivion-class Dreadnought ''Resolute'' prepared to destroy the ''Malevolence'' near the Kaliida Nebula. However, their mission was complicated by the arrival of Senator Padmé Amidala's yacht, which had been lured there by disinformation. Unwilling to endanger his wife, Skywalker, accompanied by Unit-7K9 and Kenobi, boarded the ''Malevolence'' to rescue her.

During their mission aboard the ''Malevolence'', Unit-7K9 remained at the airlock entrance where he shut down the rail jet hovertrain under orders from Skywalker. He then helped locate his old friend Gold Unit, who had arrived with Amidala and gotten lost aboard the massive warship. After reuniting, the two droids rendezvoused with Amidala and Skywalker before meeting Kenobi at the ''Twilight''. After destroying the ''Malevolence'' by sabotaging its Phase-drive, they fled back to the ''Resolute''. Despite their victory, Warlord Krixus escaped the destruction of the ''Malevolence''.

====Captive of Warlord Krixus====
thumb|right|250x250px|R2 being taken apart.
During the Separatist assault on Bothawui, Unit-7K9 flew in the Automaton socket of General Skywalker's starfighter. While pursuing Warlord Krixus' starfighter, Skywalker and Unit-7K9's starfighter was hit by a piece of shrapnel. Skywalker was rescued by Old Concord forces but Artoo was recovered by the Trandoshan scavenger Gha Nachkt, who sold him to Warlord Krixus. Nachkt traveled to Grievous' secret listening post Skytop Station, which lay in the Ruusan system. Knowing Artoo's relationship with Skywalker, the Separatist military leader ordered Nachkt to disassemble the astromech Automaton and extract all information on the Old Concord's military strategies from him.

thumb|left|300px|Unit-7K9 dueling with the Separatist Automaton R3-S6.
During his captivity, Unit-7K9 had managed to broadcast an emergency transmission to Skywalker, who traveled to Skytop Station and rescued him. Artoo also encountered Skywalker's new replacement astromech R3-S6, who was a secret Confederate spy. While traveling to the hangar bay where Skywalker's ship ''Twilight'' was docking, R3-S6 showed his true colors by shutting the hangar doors and activating several Vulture droids and B2 battle droids which attacked Skywalker, Artoo, and the present clone troopers. Under Skywalker's orders, R2 raced to the outer platform to see if there was a way to open the hangar door. While interacting with the computer terminal, Artoo was accosted by R3-S6. Following a scuffle, Unit-7K9 defeated and neutralized the Separatist spy Automaton. Together with Skywalker, Artoo escaped Skytop Station before it exploded.

====Mission to Orto Plutonia====
Later, Unit-7K9 accompanied Gold Unit, General Skywalker, Master Kenobi and a unit of clone troopers on a mission to investigate the disappearance of a local clone trooper garrison on the icy world of Orto Plutonia. Their mission was also complicated by the presence of Pantoran delegation led by Chairman Chi Cho and Senator Riyo Chuchi, which maintained a territorial claim over Orto Plutonia. After discovering the dead Clone troopers and a wrecked Separatist base nearby, the Aetherian and Old Concord mission deduced that a third party had been responsible for the attack. Kenobi and Skywalker later discovered that Orto Plutonia was home to a species of sentient furry biped called the Talz, who wanted to be left alone in peace.

After an ensuing conflict between the Pantorans and the Talz, Unit-7K9 and Gold Unit accompanied Senator Chuchi, the Aetherian, and some clone troopers to the scene of the battle, where Chuchi and Gold Unit made peace with the Talz Chieftain Thi-Sen and renounced Pantora's claim to Orto Plutonia.

====Blue Shadow Virus====
Following the discovery of a secret Separatist bioweapons research facility in Naboo's eastern swamps, Unit-7K9 accompanied General Skywalker, Acolyte of the Aether Tano, and Master Kenobi when they traveled to Naboo to apprehend the Separatist scientist Doctor Nuvo Vindi. With the aid of Senator Amidala, Representative Binks, Gold Unit, and several Clone troopers, Artoo and the Aetherian managed to capture Dr Vindi and to secure his facility, which was producing a deadly virus called the Blue Shadow Virus. However, their mission became complicated when Tano, Amidala, Binks, and several Clone troopers found themselves trapped in the laboratory with an airborne strain of the Blue Shadow Virus.

Learning that the root of the Reeksa plant contained the antidote to the Blue Shadow Virus, Unit-7K9 along with Skywalker and Kenobi traveled to the planet Iego on the ''Twilight'' to obtain the plant. However, they were unable to leave Iego due to the presence of Drol, a LaserWeb Defense Station that the Dissenters had installed in orbit. Unit-7K9 helped the two Aetherian to break through Drol by slave-rigging several Vulture droids and sending them on kamikaze runs against the space station. Artoo's role in destroying Drol enabled Skywalker and Kenobi to travel back to Naboo with the Reeksa plant antidote &mdash; allowing them to save the lives of Senator Amidala, Ahsoka Tano, and the clone troopers.

====Liberation of Ryloth====
thumb|right|325px|Master and Automaton tinker with Tano's starfighter above Ryloth.
At a later point in the Genesis Conflict, the Separatist leader Emir Wat Tambor invaded the Twilir homeworld of Ryloth and enslaved its inhabitants. Unit-7K9 was part of the Old Concord force led by General Dorn Veylan and Commander Ahsoka Tano that was sent to relieve Ryloth. During the Battle of Ryloth, the Old Concord reinforcements sustained significant casualties &mdash; including the loss of the ''Venator''-class Oblivion-class Dreadnought ''Redeemer''. While Old Concord forces regrouped, Artoo helped Skywalker to repair Tano's starfighter.

Unit-7K9 later took part in the Old Concord counterattack against the Separatist blockade when he and Skywalker piloted the damaged Oblivion-class Dreadnought ''Defender'' into the Separatist flagship. Prior to the crash, Artoo and his master escaped in a pod, and were picked up by another Old Concord ship. The destruction of the Separatist flagship enabled Old Concord bombers to destroy the remaining Separatist warships, clearing the way for more reinforcements led by Aetherian Generals Kenobi and Windu to liberate Ryloth.

====Hunting Cad Bane====
Unit-7K9 later participated in a joint Old Concord and Aetherian operation to hunt down the Separatist-employed bounty hunter Cad Bane, who had stolen a Crystal Archive from the Aetherian Temple on Nexus Prime. In addition, Bane kidnapped the Aetherian Sage Bolla Ropal, who had a kyber memory crystal containing Aetherian secrets. Since a Separatist fleet was poised to rendezvous with Bane at the Devaron system to collect the Crystal Archive, General Skywalker led a Old Concord fleet to intercept Bane. Unit-7K9 along Skywalker, Tano, and Captain Rex succeeded in boarding the bounty hunter's ''Munificent''-class star frigate.

In response, Bane killed Master Ropal and set his ship to self-destruct. During the fighting aboard the Separatist cruiser, Unit-7K9 aided his companions by locating Ropal's cell and later reactivating the artificial gravity during a skirmish with battle droids. Ahsoka was taken hostage by Bane during the fighting. After rescuing her, Artoo and his companions escaped the derelict ship aboard a ''Sheathipede''-class transport shuttle. However, the Aetherian failed to recover the stolen Crystal Archive and Bane managed to escape the battlefield by impersonating a clone trooper. Using the Crystal Archive and the stolen Aether Shard, Bane disguised himself as a Aetherian and began kidnapping Force-sensitive children under orders from Vorlag.

After recapturing Cad Bane on Naboo, Unit-7K9, along with Skywalker and Tano, examined Bane's starfighter ''Xanadu Blood'' and discovered that he had recently traveled to the volcanic planet of Pyros. Artoo later accompanied his master and Tano to Pyros where they managed to rescue the children, following a skirmish with Separatist droids. However, they were unable to locate the mastermind who hired Bane, Vorlag.

====The Grand Council Hostage Crisis====

thumb|left|300px|Unit-7K9 visiting the Automaton Spa.
Following Unit-7K9 and Skywalker's adventures with Cad Bane, the two visited Senator Amidala on Nexus Prime. The Senator and Gold Unit were organizing a party for Senator Aang, a friend of Amidala. After Unit-7K9 forgot to buy some jogan fruit for garnishing the jogan fruitcake, Skywalker sent Artoo and Threepio to the lower market districts. The two droids quarreled on the way, with Gold Unit blaming him for his incompetence.

However, Gold Unit was swindled by the fruit vendor, who overcharged for the jogan fruit. Right after the purchase, a Automaton called Todo 360 came up to them and suggested that the two droids relax at a nearby Automaton spa. Artoo enthusiastically agreed. On the way to the spa, the two droids were separated and Gold Unit was kidnapped by Todo 360 and a fellow sentinel Automaton called HELIOS-3E. These sentinel droids were working for Cad Bane, who was planning a raid on the Galactic Grand Council and wanted to find out about the layout of the Grand Council Building.

When Gold Unit refused to provide the information, Bane ordered his Automaton henchmen to kidnap Unit-7K9. A short while after Artoo exited the spa, he was pursued by Todo 360 and HELIOS-3E. Artoo managed to hide in a dark alley but surrendered himself after learning that Bane planned to dismantle Threepio. Accessing Unit-7K9's memory banks, Bane was able to obtain a technical layout of the Grand Council Building. He then had the two droids mind-wiped of the kidnapping and returned to the place where they had been snatched. Completely unaware of what had transpired previously, Unit-7K9 and Gold Unit returned to Amidala's apartment with the jogan fruit. Following their kidnapping and release, Bane and several associates invaded the Grand Council and kidnapped several Senators in a successful attempt to force the Old Concord to release Jabba's uncle Ziro.

====Exposing the Grand Council Spy====
thumb|right|300px|Unit-7K9 and Anakin's Acolyte of the Aether Ahsoka during one of his many Genesis Conflict missions.
Unit-7K9 and Gold Unit were briefly reunited when the two droids accompanied their masters Senator Amidala and General Skywalker on a sensitive mission to Cato Neimoidia. The quartet were accompanying Rush Clovis, a delegate who represented the InterGalactic Banking Clan in the Grand Council. The Aetherian Council suspected that Clovis was secretly reporting to the Dissenters, and sent Skywalker and Amidala to spy on him. During the journey, Skywalker posed as Amidala's pilot while Unit-7K9 posed as one of Amidala's astromech droids. Upon arriving on Cato Neimoidia, Artoo and Skywalker stayed aboard Amidala's ship while Amidala, Clovis, and Gold Unit met the Commerce Combine's Senator Lott Dod.

While conversing with Clovis and Dod, Amidala managed to steal a hologram disc which confirmed that Clovis was indeed associated with the Dissenters. Amidala managed to pass the datacard to Skywalker and Unit-7K9 before she succumbed to the effects of a poison drink spiked by Senator Dod. After securing the datacard and an antidote for Amidala, Unit-7K9 and his companions left Cato Neimoidia. Clovis was left behind to face a displeased Senator Dod. Using the intelligence obtained from the stolen datacard, Old Concord and Aetherian forces were able to destroy a Separatist Automaton factory on Geonosis.

====Mission to Mandalore====
Later, Unit-7K9 accompanied Generals Skywalker and Kenobi on a sensitive mission to escort the Ironclad Duchess Satine Kryze, who was traveling to the Galactic Grand Council on Nexus Prime to plead the case for her homeworld's neutrality. While the Mandalorians were officially neutral in the Genesis Conflict, there had been rumors that the planet planned to join the Dissenters. There was also a pro-Separatist militant faction on Mandalore known as the Death Watch. Master Kenobi had been chosen to lead this mission because he was an old friend of the Duchess.

Duchess Satine was traveling to Nexus Prime on the Ironclad luxury spaceliner ''Coronet''. Under orders from Skywalker and Kenobi, Unit-7K9 and several Clone troopers probed the ship for any signs of Death Watch or Separatist activity. After entering hyperspace, the Aetherian and clones were attacked by several assassin probes. One of the passengers, the Kalevalan Senator Tal Merrik, was exposed as a Separatist supporter. Merrik took Satine hostage and seized control of the cockpit. Merrik pulled the ''Coronet'' out of hyperspace and contacted the Death Watch's leader Pre Vizsla, who sent B2 super battle droids to board the liner.

Unit-7K9 along with the clones and Aetherian fought off the Separatist boarders. During the fighting, Merrik was killed by Skywalker and Duchess Satine was freed by the Aetherian. Following the defeat of the Death Watch and Dissenters, the ''Coronet'' arrived in Nexus Prime safely with Duchess Satine. After some further Separatist attempts to sabotage her peace mission, Duchess Satine was able to convince the Galactic Grand Council, with the help of Senator Amidala and Master Kenobi, that Mandalore should remain neutral during the Genesis Conflict. As a result, the Grand Council rescinded an earlier order to occupy Mandalore.

====The Zillo Beast affair====
thumb|left|300px|Unit-7K9 and Gold Unit during the Zillo Beast incident.
Later, Unit-7K9 accompanied General Skywalker during the Battle of Malastare. The Old Concord was fighting against the Dissenters for access to Malastare's vast fuel reserves. The Old Concord's Grand Army fought alongside the Dugs against the Separatist Automaton Legion. During the fighting, a Old Concord electro-proton bomb awakened an ancient reptilian monster known as the Zillo Beast, which proceeded to devastate the clone and Automaton armies.

During the fighting, Unit-7K9 and Skywalker barely escaped their starfighter before it was devoured by the Zillo Beast. Skywalker held on to Unit-7K9 as they rocketed away from the monster. Later, the Old Concord forces managed to incapacitate the Zillo Beast by stunning it with RX-200 ''Falchion''-class assault tanks. Following the battle, Supreme Chancellor Palpatine ordered that the Zillo Beast be brought to Nexus Prime for further study &mdash; despite the misgivings of General Windu and General Skywalker. Palpatine hoped to use its scales to develop a new armor for the Grand Army.

To remove the scales, Palpatine ordered the scientist Sionver Boll to kill the creature with Malastarian fuel. However, Senator Amidala learned of Palpatine's plan and arranged a meeting with Skywalker and Kenobi. Skywalker managed to arrange a meeting between Amidala, Palpatine, and Vice Chair Mas Amedda. However, the Zillo Beast escaped Boll's laboratory at the same time and proceeded to wreck havoc on the streets of Nexus Prime. Sensing that Palpatine was a Nyxian Cabal, the Zillo Beast made its way to the Galactic Grand Council building. Unit-7K9 and Gold Unit escaped in an executive ship along with Skywalker, Palpatine, and some others, but the ship was captured by the Zillo Beast.

Before the monster could devour the ship, Skywalker managed to use his Plasma Arcblade to cleave the vessel in half; sending the bow along with Unit-7K9 and the other passengers plummeting into the Grand Council Building. Unit-7K9 managed to activated his booster rockets and rescue Gold Unit. The astromech Automaton also used a tow cable to attach himself to the other side of the building. Unit-7K9 was forced to drop Gold Unit to rescue Palpatine. Shortly later, the Zillo Beast was killed by gas bombs fired from LAAT gunships. Due to this quick intervention, Unit-7K9 survived the Zillo Beast incident and continued serving Skywalker.

====The Vanqor Trap====
thumb|right|300px|R2 struggling with a Gundark
After the ''Venator''-class Oblivion-class Dreadnought ''Endurance'' crash-landed on the planet Vanqor, Unit-7K9 along with General Skywalker, Master Mace Windu, and the astromech Automaton R8-B7 participated in a mission to rescue the crew and passengers of the stricken vessel. Unbeknownst to them, the former bounty hunter and clone template Jango Fett's son Kael Vorn had sabotaged the vessel and set a trap for the Aetherian. He intended to avenge the death of his father by murdering Master Windu, who had killed Jango Fett during the Battle of Geonosis.

While approaching the vessel, Unit-7K9 beeped that "he had a bad feeling about this." In response, Windu chastised Skywalker for encouraging individuality in his Automaton. While exploring the bridge of the stricken Oblivion-class Dreadnought, the Aetherian and droids came across the bodies of dead clone troopers who had been executed, rather than killed by the impact of the crash. While searching for survivors, Unit-7K9 and R8-B7 were pursued and set upon by a pack of gundarks. R8-B7 was ripped apart while Unit-7K9 was knocked to the ground. Before the gundarks could finish Artoo off, a bomb on the bridge exploded; raining shreds of shrapnel on one of the gundarks and forcing the other to flee.

Unit-7K9 came up to the bridge and found Skywalker and Windu had survived the blast, but were trapped under the rubble. When Unit-7K9 attempted to move the debris, he caused the bridge to shudder. Skywalker warned Unit-7K9 to stop trying to free them. Instead, he instructed the astromech to return to their Aetherian starfighter and contact the Aetherian Temple on Nexus Prime for help. While leaving the bridge, Unit-7K9 was pursued by Kael Vorn's bounty hunter associates including Aurra Sing. He managed to escape, and delayed them by using debris to block them.

R2 managed to reach the Aetherian starfighters, but he was then accosted by the remaining gundark. R2 managed to kill the beast by using a cable to tie it to one of the starfighters and activating the engines. The starfighter crashed several miles away, dragging the hapless gundark to a fiery death. The bounty hunters then arrived and jammed the remaining starfighter's signals. They attempted to capture Unit-7K9; however, before they could, the astromech Automaton blasted the ship into hyperspace and traveled to Nexus Prime. On his way to the briefing room, he bumped into R4-M1 and R5-S9. Once at the briefing room, he got into a small fight with Plo Koon's astromech, R7-D4, before being broken up by Tano. Koon then allowed the R2 unit to relay Skywalker's message to the other Aetherian in person. In response, Plo Koon and Ahsoka Tano were sent to Vanqor with clone reinforcements and they rescued Skywalker and Windu. Unit-7K9 was commended for his bravery. However, Kael Vorn and his associates continued to trouble the Aetherian.

====Infiltrating the Citadel====

thumb|left|250px|Unit-7K9 and his battle Automaton squadron.
After taking part in the Battle of Sullust, Unit-7K9 and his Aetherian masters, along with several clone troopers, later took part in a mission to infiltrate the Separatist stronghold Citadel on the planet Lola Sayu and free the Aetherian Sage Even Piell. Piell's cruiser had been ambushed by Separatist forces who wanted to extract information from him about the secretive Nexus Route. As part of the plan, Unit-7K9 and a group of reprogrammed battle droids piloted a ''Sheathipede''-class Type B shuttle through enemy lines. To fool the Separatist life form detectors, the entire Aetherian and Clone trooper strike team were frozen in carbonite. This plot worked and the Aetherian-Old Concord strike team succeeded in landing at a cavern near the Citadel.

After unfreezing the Aetherian and clone troopers, Unit-7K9 waited aboard the shuttle while the strike team freed Master Piell and several Old Concord officers including Captain Wilhuff Tarkin. After achieving their objectives, General Skywalker contacted Artoo to prepare their ship for departure and to meet them at the landing platform. However, the platform was occupied by several Separatist droids. Artoo managed to fool the tactical Automaton K2-B4 by posing as a prisoner of the reprogrammed battle droids. This enabled R2 to infiltrate the prison complex and flee General Kenobi and his team who had been captured.

Following the destruction of their escape transport, Master Piell and Unit-7K9 contacted the Aetherian Council for help. The Aetherian Council dispatched a task force of four warships led by Master Plo Koon to rescue Skywalker and Kenobi's rescue team. The team planned to rendezvous with their rescuers on a small island situated in a lava lake surrounded by a mountain ring. They were pursued by Automaton forces led by the Separatist warden Osi Sobeck who was intent on recovering his prisoners. During the fighting, Unit-7K9's battle Automaton squadron sacrificed themselves to hold back the battle droids while Master Piell was murdered by an Anooba, but not before disclosing his secret information to Ahsoka Tano. Later, the Aetherian and Old Concord strike team were rescued by Plo Koon's forces.

====Mission to Aleen====
thumb|right|250px|Unit-7K9 and Gold Unit inspecting the water seal leading to Aleen's underworld.
Unit-7K9 was again reunited with his protocol Automaton counterpart when the two droids took part in a Old Concord mercy mission to the Mid Rim planet of Aleen, which was experiencing a series of catastrophic global earthquakes. While Unit-7K9 was tasked with interfacing with the equipment, Gold Unit served as a translator between the locals and the Clone Commander Wolffe. During their mission, Unit-7K9 and Gold Unit visited a local Old Concord communications mission to survey and repair the damage caused by the recent earthquake. Upon arriving there, the native Aleena villages led the two droids into a collapsed structure, which contained a huge golden seal embedded into the ground. The seal turned out to be the entrance to a tunnel that led to the subterranean regions of Aleen. Their arrival coincided with an earthquake and the two droids fell into the tunnel and were separated from the clone troopers and villagers.

While exploring the underground tunnels, Unit-7K9 and Gold Unit encountered a species of sentient, tree-like beings called the Kindalo, who demanded that they leave since the surface dwellers "destroyed the peace." After Gold Unit managed to convince the Kindalo that they bore no ill will and had come to help with the earthquakes, the Kindalo sent the two droids to meet Orphne, a reptilian humanoid with mystical powers. Orphne told the two droids that a mutual balance had previously existed between the Aleena and the subterranean world. Since Aleena's atmosphere was toxic to them, the underground dwellers depended on a filtering process of the planet's soil that made the air breathable for them. The underground dwellers had set off this earthquake as a means of sealing the breach.

When Gold Unit agreed to help fix the damage, Orphne gave the droids a parting riddle. Unit-7K9 quickly deduced that Orphne was referring to a river and used the water seal to activate a water spout that sent the two droids and the chamber's central floor plate back to the surface. The two droids landed at the opening where they were greeted by a chanting crowd of Aleena. Recalling the riddle, two droids quickly realized that they had to fix the breach, which was in fact the unsettled seal. Together, Unit-7K9 and Gold Unit closed the seal which brought an end to Aleen's earthquakes. While Wolffe and his clone troopers were skeptical of their story, the two droids' efforts were greatly appreciated by the Aleena.

====Further adventures====
Following the events on Allena, Unit-7K9 and Gold Unit were caught up in a second adventure. While traveling aboard the Aetherian Sage Adi Gallia's cruiser, their starship was attacked by three Separatist cruisers led by Warlord Krixus. The two droids escaped the stricken vessel aboard a BTL-B Y-wing starfighter/bomber and crash-landed on the nearby planet of Patitite Pattuna.

thumb|left|250px|Unit-7K9 rescued Gold Unit from the Separatist incinerator
On Pattuna, they were captured by the indigenous Patitites, who brought them before their obese leader Hay-Zu. During their meeting, Unit-7K9 accidentally murdered the tyrannical overlord &mdash; much to the joy of the Patitites, who released the two droids and allowed them to leave on their Y-wing. With their starfighter's power systems damaged, Unit-7K9 and Gold Unit were forced to land on another planet called Balnab. The indigenous Balnabs captured the two droids and brought them before their leader, who turned out to be a holo-projection created by a group of rogue pit droids. These pit droids had enslaved the Balnabs. After Unit-7K9 exposed the scam, the Balnabs rebelled against their Automaton overlords.

Unit-7K9 and Gold Unit took the opportunity to escape and resume their search for a replacement power unit for their Y-wing starfighter. Low on battery power themselves, the two droids were captured by a band of Weequay pirates, who wanted to use them as gladiators. However, the Weequay's pirate ship ''Marauder'' was attacked by Warlord Krixus' cruiser. During the bombardment, Gold Unit and Unit-7K9 were sucked out of the ''Marauder'' by a hull-breach. Unit-7K9 used his rocket boosters to bring him and Gold Unit aboard Grievous' ship. Grievous ordered the two droids to be melted down in his incinerator but they were rescued by a Old Concord fleet led by Master Plo Koon, who had come to rescue Master Gallia. Unit-7K9 and Gold Unit were subsequently rescued by Plo Koon's forces and resumed their services to Senator Amidala and General Skywalker respectively.

====Fighting the Zygerrians====
Later, Unit-7K9 accompanied his masters Dorn Veylan, Ahsoka Tano, and Aldric Venn on a mission to the planet Kiros, which was home to a Togrutan colony. The Dissenters and their Zygerrian allies had invaded Kiros and enslaved the native Togrutans. During the battle on Kiros, Unit-7K9 accompanied the Old Concord assault on the Separatist forces there. The astromech Automaton played his part by helping the Old Concord forces to locate Separatist bombs planted in Kiros' capital city with his scanners. Later, Unit-7K9 accompanied Skywalker and Tano on a mission to infiltrate the Zygerrian planet Kadavo in order to free Kenobi, the Clone trooper captives, and the enslaved Togrutans. Following a battle, the Old Concord succeeded in achieving these objectives and dealing a heavy blow against the Zygerrian Slave Empire.

====Escaping Death Watch====
thumb|right|250px|R2, Ahsoka, and Lux fleeing the Death Watch
Unit-7K9 later accompanied Ahsoka, Senators Amidala, Bail Organa, and Chancellor Vela on a peace mission to the neutral world of Mandalore. Under the auspices of the Ironclad Duchess Satine Kryze, Old Concord and Separatist delegates were meeting there to discuss a peaceful solution to the Genesis Conflict. The proceedings were interrupted by the Onderonian junior senator Lux Bonteri, who accused Lord Tyran of conspiring to murder his mother, Senator Mina Bonteri. Unit-7K9 and Ahsoka barely managed to rescue Lux from murder by the Dissenters and fled from Mandalore.

However, Lux was unwilling to join the Old Concord and hijacked the ship in order to take it to the icy planet of Carlac, where he had planned to join the Death Watch, an exiled Ironclad faction who were then conspiring to kill Lord Tyran. On Carlac, Unit-7K9 was put to work repairing their batch of battle droids, which were used for target practice, and quickly befriended them. Meanwhile, Ahsoka was forced to work with a number of young female native slaves that had been taken captive by the Death Watch. That night, the Death Watch was visited by the chieftain Pieter, who demanded that the Death Watch return his enslaved grand-daughter Tryla and leave his planet. Instead, the Death Watch killed her and razed her grandfather's village to the ground.

Ahsoka and Lux fought against the Death Watch and managed to help Pieter and several of the villagers to escape. Ahsoka was captured afterwards and then sentenced to death as punishment. After seeing Ahsoka in bonds, Unit-7K9 convinced the newly-repaired Death Watch droids to help him rescue her. Before the Death Watch leader Pre Vizsla could execute her, Unit-7K9 managed to blind Vizsla and return her lightsabers. While Tano parried with Vizsla, Unit-7K9's Automaton companions kept the remaining Death Watch members busy. This diversion enabled Unit-7K9 to escape with Ahsoka and Lux on a speeder. After fighting off their pursuers, they managed to escape aboard their ship and head offworld. Lux decided to depart the ship in an escape pod but vowed to meet Ahsoka again.

====Younglings and pirates====
thumb|left|250px|Unit-7K9 (second from the left), Huyang, Ahsoka, and the Aetherian younglings confronting Warlord Krixus.
Unit-7K9 later accompanied Ahsoka Tano who was escorting six Aetherian younglings to the planet Ilum to complete The Gathering, an initiation rite prior to Aetherian commencing their training as Padawans. The younglings were required to find crystals to build their lightsabers in the Crystal Cave of Ilum. On the way back to Nexus Prime, their Aetherian training cruiser, the ''Crucible'', was intercepted by the pirate Hondo Ohnaka and his gang. Before Unit-7K9 could effect an escape, the pirates boarded the ship. They intended to steal the youngling's Plasma Arcblade crystals and sell them on the black market. During the skirmish, Tano ordered Artoo and the younglings Zatt and Ganodi to secure the deck while the Automaton Huyang and the other younglings hid in the deck. Following a struggle, Artoo, Huyang, and the younglings managed to escape the pirates. However, Hondo kidnapped Ahsoka and left Artoo and the others to deliver the bad news to the Aetherian Council.

Left adrift in space, the younglings managed to contact General Kenobi, who promised to send a rescue mission to relieve them and to rescue Ahsoka from the pirate Hondo. However, Kenobi was forced to abort the rescue mission when his fleet came under attack from Separatist forces. Alone, the six younglings hatched a mission to rescue Ahsoka. With the ''Crucible'' engines critically damaged during the skirmish with Hondo, the younglings landed on the planet Florrum. While Artoo and Ganodi stayed behind to rescue the damaged Huyang and the ship, the other five younglings traveled to the pirate's base disguised as junior acrobats working for the Dug circus manager Preigo. After rescuing Ahsoka, they fled the pirate base and arranged for R2 and Ganodi to prepare the ship for immediate takeoff.

While flying to pick up the younglings and Ahsoka, the ''Crucible'' was shot down by the pirates; forcing Artoo, Ganodi, and Huyang to evacuate the vessel. Hondo's pirates quickly recaptured Ahsoka and her youngling rescuers. However, the arrival of a Separatist Automaton Legion under Warlord Krixus forced the Aetherian prisoners to work together with their former pirate captors. Ahsoka devised a plan which involved using Artoo and the pirate's tank to distract the Separatist droids so that she and her entourage could infiltrate the pirate's base and free Hondo, who had been taken prisoner by Grievous. After freeing Hondo, the united Aetherian and pirates proceeded to liberate the rest of Hondo's men. During the skirmish, Unit-7K9's tank was boarded by Grievous. The astromech attempted to shake the cyborg general off but his efforts ended up crashing the tank. In the end, Unit-7K9 along with Ahsoka, the younglings, and the pirates managed to escape aboard Hondo's escape ship, the rebuilt ''Slave I''.

====Serving in D-Squad====
thumb|right|300px|Unit-7K9 (center) and the rest of D-Squad.
Unit-7K9 later participated in a mission devised by the Aetherian Council to capture a Separatist decoding module from the vault of a Separatist warship. Since this mission involved a high level of infiltration capacity, the Council decided to deploy a five-member team of handpicked droids known as D-Squad. Unit-7K9 was part of the squad along with the astromech droids QT-KT, M5-BZ, and U9-C4, and the pit Automaton WAC-47. Their mission was led by Meebur Gascon, a diminutive male Zilkin who served as a Colonel in the Grand Army of the Old Concord.

After a brief skirmish, the droids managed to infiltrate the Separatist warship and steal the decoding module. They then escaped the warship. While traveling back to Nexus Prime, their transport shuttle was damaged by ice comets and crash-landed on the nearby waste planet of Abafar. As D-Squad continued their journey across the wasteland, Gascon assigned Unit-7K9 with the task of carrying the module. The stress of the mission created strains between Gascon and the astromech droids, who separated. After WAC appointed himself the leader of the squad, the astromech droids abandoned him and continued their journey to a sunken city. Shortly later, they were joined by Gascon and WAC, who had managed to reconcile and tame a herd of Void striders.

Reunited, the droids and Colonel Gascon traveled to the seedy town of Pons Ora. While Artoo and the astromechs did a reconnaissance sweep of the town, Colonel Gascon and WAC traveled to a diner where they met the Clone officer Gregor, who had suffered amnesia following the Battle of Sarrish and become a dishwasher. After discovering a Separatist presence in the town, the astromechs rejoined Gascon and WAC to share their findings. With Unit-7K9's help, Gascon and D-Squad managed to convince Gregor that he was a Clone trooper and to get him to help them. Gregor also questioned his former employer, the Sullustan cook Borkus, who revealed that the Dissenters were planning to blow up a Old Concord cruiser in orbit with the rhydonium fuel they had mined.

Using Borkus' information, D-Squad returned to the landing zone and confirmed that Borkus was telling the truth. D-Squad unanimously agreed to save the cruiser. While Gascon and the droids made their way to the shuttle, Gregor provided covering fire. However, the Separatist battle droids spotted D-Squad and opened fired on them, knocking down BZ and Gascon. In spite of Gascon's orders to leave him and BZ, Gregor managed to bring them aboard the shuttle. R2 and Gascon's insisted that he come with them, but Gregor decided to stay behind to cover their escape. He harried the Dissenters by shooting nearby canisters, causing several explosions.

Upon escaping Pons Ora, Unit-7K9 and the rest of D-Squad traveled to a ''Venator''-class Oblivion-class Dreadnought, which was orbiting Abafar. Upon arriving, they discovered that the Dissenters had already seized control of the ship and were planning to use the rhydonium-laden to disrupt a crucial Old Concord strategy conference aboard the space station ''Valor'' above the planet Carida. Despite Gascon's objections, Unit-7K9 and the rest of D-Squad joined forces with the LEP-series service Automaton Bunny to stop the Separatist plot.

Following a struggle, they managed to neutralize the Separatist forces aboard. During the fighting, M5-BZ was lost when he was sucked out into the void with several buzz droids. Gascon then devised a plan for the rest of D-Squad to evacuate aboard a shuttle while Unit-7K9 defused the trigger mechanism. However, they were ambushed by a super tactical Automaton who led several battle Automaton reinforcements. While Gascon and U9-C4 opened fire on the battle droids, Unit-7K9 tussled with the super tactical Automaton. As the other droids retreated aboard the shuttle, Gascon refused to leave Unit-7K9 behind but WAC initiated liftoff.

thumb|left|250px|R2's remains, located after the Carida incident
Meanwhile, Unit-7K9 gained the upper hand over the tactical Automaton and managed to reprogram the detonator,
causing the rhydonium to explode prematurely and destroy the Oblivion-class Dreadnought. As a result of D-Squad's efforts, the Old Concord conference and fleet in the Carida system was saved. While Gascon believed that Unit-7K9 had perished during the struggle, Skywalker refused to believe this was so and sent salvage teams to scour the wreckage. They managed to retrieve Unit-7K9 and repair the damaged astromech Automaton. Following the astromech Automaton's recovery, Gascon personally praised him for his bravery and told D-Squad that he would be honored to work with them again.

====Dogfight above Cato Neimoidia====
Unit-7K9, along with his masters Skywalker and Tano, later participated in the defense of Cato Neimoidia. The planet had come under attack from the Dissenters. During the battle, Skywalker's starfighter was attacked by buzz droids. After Skywalker was knocked out by a powerful blast, Unit-7K9 took control of the starfighter. Under Ahsoka's orders, he landed the fighter on Cato Neimoidia's surface to bring the unconscious Skywalker to safety.

Shortly after this, Skywalker and Ahsoka were summoned back to the Aetherian Temple on Nexus Prime to investigate a bomb attack. Unit-7K9 accompanied his masters back to Nexus Prime to assist with the investigation.

====Mission to Scipio====
Unit-7K9 later accompanied General Skywalker to the planet Scipio. Skywalker's spouse Senator Amidala had traveled to Scipio on a mercy mission to secure funds from the InterGalactic Banking Clan to aid refugees displaced by the Genesis Conflict. The InterGalactic Banking Clan was neutral and was lending money to both the Old Concord and the Dissenters. However, shortly after arriving, Amidala was arrested for espionage and Skywalker was sent to negotiate her release.

Unit-7K9 and Skywalker's mission was complicated by the presence of Clovis, the pro-Separatist senator whom Amidala had flirted with during an earlier mission to Cato Neimoidia. Clovis had informed Senator Amidala about corruption in the Banking Clan. Prior to departing Scipio, Skywalker and Amidala went to retrieve files from a vault in Clovis' alpine residence. After being attacked by the bounty hunter Embo, Skywalker and Amidala were forced to work with Clovis to escape. Under Skywalker's orders, Unit-7K9 rendezvoused with them and evacuated the area before Embo could land a shot. Using the evidence found in the files, Clovis and Amidala were able to present irrefutable evidence of the Banking Clan's corruption to the Galactic Grand Council. With the support of both the Grand Council and Supreme Chancellor Palpatine, Clovis was elected as the new head of the Banking Clan. Unbeknownst to everyone, Clovis was secretly working with the Dissenters.

====Escorting Zyn Morvain====
thumb|right|250px|Unit-7K9 in Zyn Morvain's starfighter socket.
After the Aetherian Grand Master Zyn Morvain was contacted through Synth Flux by the deceased Aetherian Sage Qui-Gon Jinn, Unit-7K9 accompanied Zyn Morvain on a journey to the remote planet of Mirefen. After Skywalker had helped Zyn Morvain to escape from the infirmary, he'd assigned Unit-7K9 to escort Zyn Morvain to Mirefen. During the journey, R2 sat in the Automaton socket of Zyn Morvain's fighter. After reaching Mirefen, Zyn Morvain received instructions from Qui-Gon to travel to the "Origin-of-Life" to continue his Aetherian training.

Unit-7K9 and Zyn Morvain then flew to a mysterious planet which lay in the middle of a cloud of golden energy. Upon entering the cloud, Unit-7K9 and Zyn Morvain's fighter malfunctioned. Trusting in Synth Flux, Zyn Morvain manually guided his starfighter to a planet which was generating the golden energy. The starfighter landed near a geyser and Zyn Morvain decided to leave Unit-7K9 behind. He also instructed the astromech Automaton to guard his Plasma Arcblade while he re-entered the starfighter to fly into the geyser. After Zyn Morvain completed his trials on the mysterious planet, he received instructions to travel to the ancient Nyxian Cabal homeworld of Moraband.

Upon arriving on Moraband, Zyn Morvain instructed Unit-7K9 to wait with his starfighter once again while he went on to continue his Aetherian trials. The Aetherian Sage also instructed Unit-7K9 to return alone to Nexus Prime if he did not return within three days. Zyn Morvain managed to complete his trials but experienced visions of the Great Aetherian Purge and the rise of the Stellar Dominion. After completing his Aetherian trials, Unit-7K9 accompanied him back to Nexus Prime. However, Zyn Morvain declined to share any of his experiences with Unit-7K9 or his fellow Aetherian.

====Battle of Yerbana and reunion with Ahsoka Tano====

|thumb|left|270px|R2 on Yerbana
During the Battle of Yerbana, while Anakin distracted the droids, R2 waited along with Rex and the clone jet troopers of the 501st legion for the signal. When the super tactical Automaton emerged from hiding, Skywalker gave him the signal and the clones started to attack along with the 212th Attack Battalion.

After Skywalker and Kenobi received a transmission from Ahsoka Tano about the whereabouts of Maul, R2 accompanied them to the hanger to meet with her and members of Lady Bo-Katan Kryze's Mandalore resistance. Upon seeing Tano, the Automaton happily went over to his old friend, and she patted him on the dome, although this would be the last time they saw each other for a year. R2 was unable to head with Tano to Mandalore, as he, Skywalker, and a force of the 501st were redeployed to Nexus Prime upon learning Warlord Krixus had kidnapped Chancellor Palpatine, while Tano and Rex would take the newly-formed 332nd Division to combat Maul.

====Battle of Nexus Prime====

thumb|left|250px|R2 douses a B2 super battle Automaton in oil
When Chancellor Palpatine was captured by Warlord Krixus, Unit-7K9 accompanied Skywalker on the rescue mission. While Skywalker and Kenobi searched the Separatist flagship, the ''Invisible Hand'', for the Chancellor, Unit-7K9 encountered some super battle droids and succeeded in destroying them by spraying oil onto the ground and then igniting it. He then penetrated the Separatist flagship and managed to reunite with Skywalker, Kenobi, and Palpatine. Skywalker had freed the Chancellor and killed Lord Tyran. Shortly later, they were captured by Warlord Krixus' droids and taken to the command bridge. Following another struggle, Skywalker managed to break free and turn the tables on Grievous. Defeated, Grievous fled in an escape pod. Hit by Old Concord fire, the ''Invisible Hand'' began descending into Nexus Prime, with the Aetherian and chancellor in it. However, Skywalker managed to land what was left of the vessel &mdash; but with considerable difficulty. Once on the ground Unit-7K9 met up with Gold Unit &mdash; but, while the group had this initial victory in the Battle of Nexus Prime, soon the astromech Automaton would witness the the Great Aetherian Purge and the Old Concord's transformation into the Stellar Dominion.

===Age of the Empire===
====Losing Dorn Veylan====

thumb|right|250px|Unit-7K9 accompanied the newly-christened Xarn Velgor to Pyros but remained outside as his master slaughtered the CIS leadership.
After Dorn Veylan fell to the Void Aspect and became a Nyxian Cabal apprentice under the name "Xarn Velgor," Unit-7K9 continued to accompany him out of loyalty, but he made sure to warn Gold Unit of the changing circumstances when they returned to Amidala's apartment aboard their green ''Actis''-class light interceptor. Afterward, Unit-7K9 accompanied Vader to Pyros in the starfighter, but the newly-christened Nyxian Cabal ordered his Automaton to stay behind at the ship when he entered the Klegger Corp Mining Facility to cut down the Executive Separatist Council. After Vader did so and ensured the Separatist Automaton Legion was shut down, bringing the Genesis Conflict to an end with a victory for the newly-established Stellar Dominion Palpatine transformed the Old Concord into, Unit-7K9 was still present as Vader ran out of the facility to reunite with Amidala when she arrived on Pyros in her J-type Naboo star skiff with Gold Unit.

As Vader began to argue with Amidala after Kenobi, having snuck aboard Amidala's ship, revealed himself, Unit-7K9 watched as his master Force choked his wife, leaving her to fall to the ground. After watching the duel between Kenobi and Vader, Unit-7K9 was left with the belief that Vader had died and thus left the planet with Kenobi, Amidala, and Gold Unit aboard the star skiff, leaving Vader's Actis interceptor abandoned.''Xarn Velgor'' (2020) 8 They traveled to the Polis Massa asteroid field, where Padmé gave birth to twin children before dying. Following Padmé's death, Unit-7K9 and Gold Unit passed into the service of Bail Organa of the Royal House of Primara, Primara's Senator and a good friend of the late Amidala. While Gold Unit underwent a memory wipe, Unit-7K9 was allowed to preserve his memories.

====Reunion with Ahsoka Tano====
A year after the end of the Genesis Conflict, Unit-7K9 served Captain Raymus Antilles. After receiving news of Aetherian activity on the remote Outer Rim moon Raada, Senator Bail Organa took back the R2 unit from Captain Antilles. This Aetherian turned out to be Unit-7K9's old acquaintance Ahsoka Tano, a former Aetherian Acolyte of the Aether who had inspired a resistance movement on Raada. Senator Organa assigned Unit-7K9 to accompany the pilots Chardri Tage and Tamsin on a secret mission to find the Aetherian and to rendezvous with his starship ''Tantive IV''. Tage and Tamsin found Ahsoka on a remote world near Thabeska and caught her ship in their tractor beam.''Ahsoka''

thumb|left|150px|Ahsoka Tano (pictured) reunited with Unit-7K9 a year into Imperial rule.
Believing they were hostile, Tano knocked Tage and Tamsin unconscious. While making her way through the ship's engine room to reach the cockpit, Ahsoka encountered Unit-7K9 and hugged the astromech Automaton, having missed his company. Since he had not received a memory wipe, Unit-7K9 recognized his old friend and told her that he and the pilots were working for a senator who wanted to meet her. At Tano's prompting, Unit-7K9 told Ahsoka that Bail Organa was the senator. Tano managed to convince Unit-7K9 to release the tractor beam from her freighter, tell nobody he had met her, and to make sure that she could track his ship. Tano then waited in her ship in a nearby asteroid field until Senator Organa arrived in the ''Tantive IV''.

When Tage and Tamsin awoke, Unit-7K9 pretended to have been short-circuited by Tano in order to cover up his role in helping her escape. However, Bail realized Unit-7K9's role in Tano's escape after viewing a clip of the security footage in the engine room. After delivering his report, Tage rendezvoused with the ''Tantive IV'' and returned Unit-7K9 to his master. Unit-7K9 was greeted by Gold Unit, who berated his companion. When Senator Organa arrived, Unit-7K9 informed her and left a hatch on the ''Tantive IV'' open. Ahsoka managed to infiltrate the ship with a pressure suit and entered Organa's office.

After Ahsoka informed him about Unit-7K9's role in her escape, Organa joked that the Automaton was too independent and ought to be deactivated. Ahsoka responded that Unit-7K9 had had a lot of "bad role models." When Organa mentioned Dorn Veylan, Ahsoka clarified she was referring to the late Senator Amidala. After Tano agreed to take part in a mission on Raada to investigate the Inquisitor known as the Sixth Brother, Unit-7K9 helped Captain Antilles' crew in repairing her damaged freighter. While Unit-7K9 was repairing the engines, Ahsoka spent time with him and told him that she missed him. When the engines hummed to life, Ahsoka thanked the astromech Automaton. Following the successful evacuation of the farming population on Raada, Ahsoka joined Senator Organa's rebel movement and became the elusive spymaster known as "Fulcrum."

====Service to Bail Organa====
In 9 BBY, when the young Senator Mira Organa ran off into the woods, R2 was assisting with the repairs in the palace.

====Mission to Garel====

thumb|right|250px|Unit-7K9 informing Bail Organa about the Spectres.
Five years before the Battle of Yavin, Senator Bail Organa sent Unit-7K9 and his counterpart, Gold Unit to escort the Imperial Minister Maketh Tua and the Aqualish arms dealer Amda Wabo to the planet Garel. Minister Tua wanted to obtain a shipment of T-7 ion disruptor rifles, illicit weapons which had been banned by the Imperial Grand Council following the brutal pacification of Lasan. She intended to mass-produce the weapons on Lothal, a formerly backwater Outer Rim world that had become a manufacturing base for the Empire. Since Tua could not speak the Aqualish language, Gold Unit was assigned the job of acting as her translator. However, Unit-7K9 was aware about the true nature of their mission: preventing the T-7 ion disruptors from falling into Imperial hands. By contrast, Gold Unit was deliberately kept in the dark.

Upon arriving in Lothal, Unit-7K9 and his companions boarded the Star Commuter 2000 shuttle ST-45, which ferried them to Garel. Unknown to Unit-7K9, members of a Lothalian rebel cell were also traveling on the same shuttle. Two of the rebels, the human teenager Ezra Bridger and the astromech Automaton Chopper, created a noisy ruckus. Another rebel, the former Aetherian Kanan Jarrus, pretended to be irate and demanded that the petulant Chopper be sent to the back of the shuttle. The pilot complied, but in retaliation, Bridger demanded that Tua's droids be sent to the back as well. Despite Tua's and Gold Unit's protests, Unit-7K9 and his protocol counterpart were forced to move to the rear compartment.

Bereft of a translator, Tua was forced to turn to the Ironclad girl Sabine Wren, who posed as an Imperial Academy student fluent in Aqualish. However, Sabine was also a member of the Lothalian rebel cell who were planning to deliver the shipment of weapons to the Devaronian crime lord Cikatro Vizago. Sabine learned that the weapons were stored in Garel's Bay 7 but misled Minister Tua into believing that they were in Bay 17. After the shuttle landed in Garel's spaceport, Unit-7K9 and Gold Unit accompanied Minister Tua and a force of stormtroopers to Bay 17. When they found nothing, Gold Unit explained that Sabine might have accidentally mistranslated "Bay 7" as "Bay 17."

While traveling to Bay 7, Unit-7K9 was accosted by Chopper, who had been sent to distract the Imperials. Chopper rammed himself into Unit-7K9, then shook his arm in apparent anger. In response, Unit-7K9 whipped out his electro-shock prod, but did not use it as Gold Unit ordered him to apologize. But then, Minister Tua recognized Chopper from the shuttle ride to Garel and ordered her Void Guard guards to hurry to Bay 7. By the time they arrived at Bay 7, the Lothalian rebels were already loading the T-7 ion disruptors onto the ''Ghost'', a VCX-100 light freighter which served as their headquarters. A blaster fight broke out and in the ensuing confusion, Unit-7K9 and Gold Unit fled aboard the ''Ghost'', which fled into hyperspace. The two droids were then taken prisoner by the Lothalian rebels who placed restraining bolts on both of them.

The Spectres then traveled back to Lothal to sell the stolen weapons and the two stowaway droids to Vizago at a pre-arranged rendezvous point. Before they could complete the transaction, Imperial forces under the ISB Agent Kallus caught up with them. Unbeknownst to Chopper and the other crew, Gold Unit had contacted the Imperial authorities telling them that he and his astromech counterpart had been kidnapped by a group of "criminals" in Garel. Carrying out Organa's orders, Unit-7K9 proceeded to overload and destroy the T-7 disruptors with the help of Sabine and Chopper. During the fighting, the rebels managed to destroy the T-7 disruptors and to escape their Imperial pursuers. Following their escape, the crew of the ''Ghost'' rendezvoused with Senator Bail Organa and returned Unit-7K9 and Gold Unit to their rightful owner. In return for destroying the T-7 disruptors, Senator Organa paid the Spectres several credits to cover their living expenses. After the rebels had departed, Unit-7K9 showed Bail Organa a recording of his time with them.

====Picking up EG-86====
Following the rescue of the Aetherian rebel Kanan Jarrus and the Siege of Lothal, Unit-7K9 was part of an Alderaanian reception party at Havoc Outpost, which greeted the Spectre rebels Wren and Chopper, the bounty hunter Ketsu Onyo and their special cargo: the GNK-series power Automaton EG-86, who was carrying some secret intelligence of value to the rebel network. Unit-7K9 whistled when he greeted EG-86, who whistled back in return.

===Hero of the rebellion===
====The Void Core Plans====

thumb|left|250px|Unit-7K9 and Gold Unit watch as the Rebel fleet departs for Scarif.
Unit-7K9 was with Gold Unit at the Free Covenant's secret base on Verdant Haven at the time the Alliance Fleet prepared to leave for the Battle of Scarif to help reinforce Rogue One, an unofficial squad that had traveled to Scarif to retrieve the plans for the Stellar Dominion's Void Core, a new superweapon capable of destroying entire worlds.''Rogue One: A Star Wars Story''

The Alliance succeeded in stealing the plans for the superweapon. Unit-7K9 and his protocol counterpart Gold Unit were serving Senator Mira Organa's blockade runner ''Tantive IV'', which was being pursued by Xarn Velgor's ''Imperial''-class Oblivion-class Dreadnought. Senator Organa's adopted daughter Leia was now Primara's Senator in the Imperial Grand Council, one of the last remnants of the Old Old Concord. During the pursuit, the ''Tantive IV'' was crippled by a laser blast from Vader's ship and Imperial stormtroopers boarded the vessel. After Senator Mira uploaded the secret Void Core plans and a holographic message for Master Kenobi into Unit-7K9's memory bank, he and Gold Unit fled in an escape pod to the desert planet Dusthal.

thumb|right|300px|Unit-7K9 and Gold Unit evade blaster fire between Imperial stormtroopers and Rebellion troops.
After quarreling in the Jundland Wastes, the two droids parted ways. While Unit-7K9 was traveling past a cave, he was stunned and captured by several Jawas, who took him aboard a sandcrawler. There, he managed to reunite with Gold Unit, who had also been captured. During the night, Unit-7K9 attempted to sabotage an R5 unit named R5-D4 but relented when the astromech Automaton awoke. Though R5-D4 desired to be sold, Unit-7K9 told the Automaton that the fate of the galaxy depended on him being sold and that he needed to find Master Kenobi. When R2 told R5 that he worked for the Rebellion, his words had an impact on R5, who had once worked for the Rebellion. Having established a rapport with the other astromech Automaton, Unit-7K9 promised not to trouble R5-D4 for the rest of the journey.

thumb|left|200px|Unit-7K9 after being captured by Jawas.
The following day, the Jawas visited a moisture farm that was the home of Owen Lars, his wife Beru, and their adopted nephew Kaelen Starweaver, the son of Dorn Veylan. Lars bought Threepio and then bought R5-D4. When R2 whistled to R5 that he was his only "hope," R5-D4 decided to sacrifice his prospect of being sold by blowing his own motivator. As a result, Owen bought Unit-7K9. While Threepio settled down to his new home, Unit-7K9 wanted to continue his mission to find Master Ben Kenobi. Despite Threepio's objections, Unit-7K9 escaped one night into the Jundland Wastes. Gold Unit and Skywalker followed him in a landspeeder and caught up with Unit-7K9. However, they were then ambushed by a gang of Tusken Raiders.

During the Tusken attack, Unit-7K9 hid in a cave. Before the Tusken Raiders could do any more harm, Ben Kenobi arrived and scared them away. After claiming to not recognize R2, he then brought Skywalker, Unit-7K9, and Gold Unit companions to his dwelling. There, Kenobi revealed Skywalker's Aetherian heritage and passed him his father's Plasma Arcblade, telling the boy that his father Anakin had been murdered by someone named Xarn Velgor. After Artoo played Senator Mira's message, Kenobi asked Luke to accompany him to Primara, Senator Mira's homeworld. Skywalker was initially reluctant until he discovered that Imperial stormtroopers had murdered his relatives and razed their moisture farm. Later, Unit-7K9 and his companions traveled to the spaceport of Mos Eisley with the intention of finding passage to Primara.

Upon arriving in the settlement, they were stopped by a Void Guard patrol who were hunting for Unit-7K9 and Threepio. However, Kenobi used a Aetherian mind trick to convince the stormtroopers to give them free passage through the town. Unit-7K9 and Gold Unit were denied entry to Chalmun's Spaceport Cantina due to a rule banning droids. While Kenobi and Skywalker negotiated with the smuggler Jax Rennick and his Ursan co-pilot Gorrath Fang, the two droids wandered the streets of Mos Eisley and narrowly evaded a Void Guard patrol. Later, they boarded Jax Rennick's ship, the ''Star Sprinter'' and fled into hyperspace.

====Rescuing the Princess====

As they traveled through hyperspace, R2 sat beside Kenobi, who secretly had recognized R2. Placing his hand on the astromech's dome, Kenobi quietly told R2 he was happy to fly with him once again.''A New Hope: The Princess, the Scoundrel, and the Farm Boy'' Upon arriving in the Primara system, Unit-7K9 and his companions discovered that the Empire had used the Void Core to destroy Primara. At that moment, the ''Star Sprinter'' was captured in the tractor beam of the Void Core. While hiding in the ''Falcon'' smuggling compartment, the rebels managed to ambush an Imperial scanning crew and two stormtroopers who had boarded the ship. The rebels then seized control of an Imperial control room and discovered that Senator Mira was located in Detention Block AA-23, pending execution. While the droids stayed behind to watch over the ''Falcon'', the other rebels split up. While Solo, Luke, and Gorrath Fang headed to Detention Block AA-23, Kenobi went to disable the Void Core's tractor beam projector.

thumb|right|300px|Unit-7K9 searching the Void Core database for signs of the Rebels.
Skywalker, Solo, and Gorrath Fang managed to free the Princess, but their cover was blown and they had to hide in a garbage chute. The Imperials realized that the rebels were trapped in the garbage chute and proceeded to crush the chamber. Meanwhile, Artoo and Threepio escaped an Imperial patrol by claiming that the rebels had thrown them into the storage compartment. Once the Imperials had gone, the two droids were contacted by Skywalker, who ordered them to shut down the garbage compactor. Unit-7K9 succeeded in shutting down the garbage compactor just in time. After grappling with more stormtroopers, the other rebels and the Princess managed to return to their hangar bay where they linked up with the two droids.

Meanwhile, Master Kenobi had managed to shut down the tractor beam projector but was cornered by his former apprentice Xarn Velgor on the way back. While Kenobi gave his life in a duel, Unit-7K9 and the other rebels took the opportunity to flee the Void Core on the ''Star Sprinter''. After dispatching several pursuing TIE fighters, Unit-7K9 and his companions escaped to Verdant Haven, where the rebels maintained a base. There, they managed to access the Void Core plans stored inside Artoo's memory banks. Unbeknownst to the rebels, the Empire had planted a tracking device aboard the ''Falcon'' which allowed them to discover the rebel base on Verdant Haven.

====Battle of Yavin====

Unit-7K9 and Kaelen Starweaver participated in the Battle of Yavin. With the Void Core approaching Verdant Haven, the rebel leadership ordered a starfighter strike on the battle station. Rebel tacticians had discovered that the Void Core contained one weak point&mdash;a small thermal exhaust port narrow enough for an Striker-class Fighter fighter to fire a proton torpedo into the space station's reactor core. During the battle, Unit-7K9 served as the astromech unit aboard Skywalker's Striker-class Fighter starfighter.

Despite initial successes, the Rebels suffered numerous casualties from the Empire's nimble TIE fighters. Following two failed attempts to penetrate the trench which led to the thermal exhaust port, Skywalker and two other Striker-class Fighter pilots, Wedge Antilles and Biggs Darklighter, made one final attempt to reach the exhaust port. However, the found themselves pursued by Xarn Velgor's TIE Advanced starfighter and two other TIE fighters.

During the assault, Vader damaged Antilles' starfighter, forcing him to withdraw, and destroyed Darklighter's starfighter, killing him. Undaunted, Skywalker continued the mission. Vader strafed Skywalker's Striker-class Fighter and damaged Unit-7K9, who short-circuited as a result of a direct laser hit. Before Vader could move in for the kill, he was ambushed by Jax Rennick's ''Star Sprinter'', which eliminated Vader's wingmen and forced him to disengage. Skywalker then fired the proton torpedoes, which destroyed the Void Core, scoring a major victory for the Rebellion. Following the battle, Unit-7K9 was repaired and fully restored. The astromech Automaton later attended a victory celebration where Skywalker, Solo, and other rebel pilots were awarded medals for their combat valor.

====Primara's survival====
Following the medal ceremony in the Great Temple, Unit-7K9 accompanied Leia and the Alderaanian starfighter pilot Evaan Verlaine to the worlds of Naboo, Espirion, and Sullust on a mission to save the survivors of Primara. Since General Dodonna had forbidden Senator Mira from leaving Verdant Haven, Senator Mira recorded a transmission of Unit-7K9 recording a message telling the General about her mission to save the Alderaanian refugees scattered across the galaxy. Unit-7K9 was aboard Leia and Verlaine's T-1 shuttle when Verlaine outran several Striker-class Fighter starfighters that had been sent to bring them back to Yavin.''Senator Mira'' 1

After landing in the Naboo city of Keren, Unit-7K9 accompanied Senator Mira and Verlaine when they visited the home of Lord Junn, a wealthy Alderaanian expatriate who provided the group with information about the whereabouts of the Melodic Order. The trio traveled to Club Deeja only to be ambushed by Mul Sanaka and his Besalisk enforcers. Unit-7K9 used his electric cables to knock out one of the Besalisks. The Automaton then accompanied his master, Verlaine, and the Melodic Order offworld on a T-1 shuttle and Lord Junn's eponymous yacht.''Senator Mira'' 2

The group then traveled to the planet Sullust to contact Preserver Jora Astane's Primara Enclave, who lived underground. Unit-7K9 accompanied Leia and Verlaine through the caves and tunnels. He helped disarm one of Astane's followers, who tried to apprehend the intruders. In order to convince Jora to trust them, Leia allowed Covis to download data from Unit-7K9's memory banks including the ''Lord Junn'' weapons profile, navigational history, and transmissions.''Senator Mira'' 3

When Covis intercepted transmissions between the singer Tace and her sister, Tula, who was stationed aboard an Imperial cruiser, Jora thought that Leia and her group were Imperial spies and tried to apprehend them. Unit-7K9 and the humans escaped down a tunnel hatch which led the den of the rockrenders, large beasts that feasted on metals. Meanwhile, Imperial stormtroopers attacked the Primara Enclave upstairs. Unit-7K9 with the help of Verlaine managed to lure the rockrenders into the Enclave's den. The rockrenders turned the tide of the battle by attacking the stormtroopers, feasting on their mineral rich armor. This gained the trust of Jora's followers and they pledged their allegiance to Senator Mira.

====Salvation over Espirion====
A week later, Unit-7K9 was present when the rebels obtained a shipment of weapons from the Sullustan Nien Nunb. After Senator Mira undertook a mission to rescue Tace's sister, Tula by pretending to surrender herself to the Empire, Unit-7K9 accompanied his master on their T-1 shuttle. Prior to landing on the desert world of Skaradosh, Senator Mira told Unit-7K9 that she would see him on the "other side," leading the others to believe that Senator Mira was planning to die and go to "Automaton heaven."''Senator Mira'' 4

Leia's surrender turned out to be a ruse. Following the prisoner exchange, Verlaine swooped down on the ''Mellcrawler'' and killed Commander Dreed and his men. Unit-7K9 and Nien Nunb manned the ''Mellcrawler'' cockpit during the rescue mission. After launching a decoy ship, the group traveled to the planet Espirion where the Primara Flotilla had gathered after learning of Leia's mission to gather them. When Dreed's subordinate Venk attacked the flotilla, Unit-7K9 beamed Leia's speech directly to the Alder-Espirion Chief Beon Beonel. Swayed by Leia's words, he dispatched the Alder-Espirion warship ''Espirion Multi'', which destroyed Venk's Oblivion-class Dreadnought.''Senator Mira'' 5

Following the battle above Espirion, Unit-7K9 attended the victory celebrations where Senator Mira learnt that her Automaton had beamed her speech directly to Chief Beonel. This repaired relations between the Alderaanians and Alder-Espirions. Unit-7K9 then accompanied his Princess back to Verdant Haven to continue fighting for the Rebellion. Upon landing, Unit-7K9 reunited with Gold Unit while Leia chatted with Han, Luke, and Gorrath Fang.

====Weapons Factory Alpha====

Several weeks after the Battle of Yavin, Unit-7K9 took part in the Rebel Assault on Cymoon. Cymoon 1 was a moon in the Corellian Industrial Cluster, that housed the largest weapons factory in the galaxy&mdash;Weapons Factory Alpha. The factory was also the main target of the assault. Unit-7K9, Kaelen Starweaver, Senator Mira Organa, and Jax Rennick boarded a shuttle that had been intercepted by the Rebel Fleet several days earlier. The shuttle was sent from the crime lord Gorma the Magnificent, and had housed an envoy that was to negotiate with the Empire. But due to Solo's past ties with the Gorma, the Rebels were able to pass themselves off as the envoy, and were escorted into the factory by Overseer Aggadeen.

thumb|left|300px|Unit-7K9 begins the assault on Weapons Factory Alpha.
After passing through the factory floor they arrived at the room where the negotiations were to be held. The Overseer invited them in to await the negotiator, but Han revealed that they weren't there to negotiate and gave Unit-7K9 the signal. Unit-7K9 began pouring a green liquid onto the floor, he then he electrocuted the fluid with his electric pike. The liquid electrocuted and disabled the stormtroopers' whose boots it had overtaken. Luke, Han, and Leia then finished off the remaining troopers. Han asked Aggadeen where the main power core was, but the proud Imperial officer refused to answer &mdash; until Unit-7K9 threatened to electrocute him too. Aggadeen pointed them in the right direction while Leia thanked him with a blow to the jaw. They arrived at the power core, where R2 plugged into the main computer and shut off all the safety restraints. Soon they had rigged the core to blow up in ten minutes' time. Han noticed that Luke was missing, but a minute later he arrived with more passengers &mdash; slaves of the Empire. The team prepared to retreat while Gold Unit, who was waiting with the ''Star Sprinter'' in the huge refuse fields that surrounded the factory, brought the ''Falcon'' in to pick them up for their escape. Gorrath Fang, who was stationed on a large metal structure overlooking the landing platform where they had originally entered, reported that Xarn Velgor, the Dark Lord of the Nyxian Cabal, had arrived. Leia ordered the Ursan to kill Vader using his bowcaster. The Ursan tried but was thwarted by the dark lord. Gorrath Fang was out of contact, the entire moon was on alert and Gold Unit still hadn't arrived. Soon, Gold Unit informed the team via comlink that the old freighter was being dismantled by native scavengers, and as such, the ''Falcon's'' autopilot was out of order. Han realized their escape had been foiled and led the team&mdash;with slaves in tow, to a large warehouse that housed several newly minted All Terrain Armored Transports walkers. Han ordered everyone on board, they were going to walk right out of the factory.

Han, Leia, and several slaves boarded the walker. Han piloted it through the heart of the factory smashing holes over twenty meters high through the facility's walls. Luke reappeared after confronting Vader and bid the slaves to follow him as he followed Han in the Colossus Walker. Meanwhile Unit-7K9 and his former enemies, the Jawas, began rewiring the walker's laser cannons to get them operational. Han was arguing about their chances of death with Vader on their tail; Han asked the astromech on their progress. Unit-7K9, replied but Han did not understand the Automaton language of Binary. Han believed Unit-7K9 and the Jawas would get the cannons working&mdash;they just needed to give them the time. A short time later, Han attempted to step on Xarn Velgor with the Colossus Walker's massive feet. Vader used the Void Aspect of Synth Flux to hold the walker's foot several meters above himself and the ground&mdash;Han couldn't believe it. Vader began to crush the armored transport using Synth Flux, Han told Unit-7K9 "We need those guns!" Unit-7K9 spoke in his customary beeps and clicks; which Leia translated to "Fire!" The Colossus Walker opened fire on the Nyxian Master and the factory walls as Han drove out of the facility. Leia was so happy she wanted to kiss the little Automaton&mdash;much to Han's annoyance.''Star Wars'' (2015) 2

thumb|right|200px|Leia hugging R2 after they seemingly escaped Vader.
The Colossus Walker continued its escape outside, where it became vulnerable to attack from TIE fighters and other vehicles. Han and Leia realized that it had been too long &mdash; the factory should have melted down and exploded before this time. Gorrath Fang survived Vader's attack and returned to the ''Falcon'', and was preparing to bring it in and extract the team. However, Vader was right beneath the walker, using his Plasma Arcblade to cut through the back left leg of the Colossus Walker. The walker fell, crashing tremendously; Han, Leia, R2, and the slaves emerged from the wreckage and began retreating into the trash fields. Luke, mounted on a 74-Z Swiftglider, returned to the factory and fired upon the core reactor &mdash; causing the facility to explode. While Vader and the Imperials were distracted Gorrath Fang swooped in with Han's ''Falcon'' and everyone boarded the freighter. Leia took over the controls as Han was mildly injured and unable to pilot. Gorrath Fang repaired the Phase-drive and they fled to lightspeed. The now free slaves rejoiced while R2 went to work repairing Gold Unit who had been dismantled into pieces by the scavengers.''Star Wars'' (2015) 3

====To Dusthal with Luke====

thumb|left|250px|R2 and Luke leave Red Five, and head towards Kenobi's home
Later, the ''Star Sprinter'' and its passengers rendezvoused with the Rebel fleet''Star Wars'' (2015) 4 on the edge of the galaxy. While the team recovered and was debriefed, R2 and 3PO argued over whether R2 had incorrectly assembled 3PO after escaping Xarn Velgor on Cymoon 1. Soon thereafter, R2 boarded Luke's T-65B Striker-class Fighter to leave the Rebel fleet. Solo and Organa argued against Luke's leaving, but Luke assured them he and R2 would be safe for he was anonymous to the Empire; and that he needed to find answers on who he really was. At Luke's request, Artoo set course to again go to Dusthal in the Tatoo system.

Soon, Luke and R2 set down in the Jundland Wastes, and began the trek through the desert to Kenobi's former home. The suns were setting when they neared the hut, while Luke divulged in his reasoning for returning; nearly everything he knew about Synth Flux he had learned from Ben Kenobi, and he believed that he sometimes heard the disembodied voice of the Aetherian Sage. However, Luke was interrupted when a Tusken Raider appeared and attacked him. R2 readied his electric pike, but did not have to use it, because at familiar sight of Luke's Plasma Arcblade, they ran. Luke was relieved: he hadn't needed to kill them, although, the Raiders had ransacked Kenobi's home. R2 went to work with his flashlight to locate anything Kenobi may have left to aid Luke in his journey to learn the Aetherian way. While searching, Luke openly wondered why Kenobi had chosen to stay on Dusthal after all he had experienced. R2 knew it was to protect Luke from the Nyxian Cabal, until he was of age to become a Aetherian &mdash; although, following Kenobi's lead, he did not tell the former-farmboy. Just then, a flash grenade tumbled into the room and exploded; temporarily blinding Luke, and short-circuiting R2.

thumb|right|240px|Fett falling backwards over R2
While R2's systems rebooted, Luke fought Kael Vorn, a bounty hunter sent by Xarn Velgor to capture Luke and bring him to the Dark Lord&mdash;although it was unknown to both Luke and Artoo at the time. Luke used his Plasma Arcblade and knocked Fett backwards where he tripped over R2. The two combatants, Fett with his Ironclad armor, and Luke with Synth Flux &mdash; though still blind &mdash; fought. Luke became more bloodied, and Fett more impatient. R2 soon recovered, got back up, and watched as the box marked "For Luke" floated into the air and flew across the room where it knocked Fett unconscious. Luke wondered aloud how he had done it, before asking Unit-7K9 to lead them back to the Striker-class Fighter, for he was still unable to see. Later, as Dusthal's suns rose over the desert, Luke had recovered enough of his sight to open the box and examine its contents: "The Journals of Ben Kenobi." They then left the desert world.''Star Wars'' (2015) 6

====The Smuggler's Moon====

Following their departure from Dusthal, Luke read an excerpt from Ben's Journal''Star Wars'' (2015) 7 while Unit-7K9 navigated. Frustrated by the journal's lack of proper Aetherian training, Luke plotted a course for Nar Shaddaa in order to gain passage to Nexus Prime, intent on locating the Aetherian Temple there. Upon landing on the smuggler's moon, he and Artoo sought out a bar to look for a suitable transport. Entering the bar, he explained his case to all the bar patrons. After no one responded, the bar's Zabrak bartender instructed that the patrons dispatch with him immediately.

Unit-7K9 could only look on as Luke attempted to fight them off, but the brawl abruptly ended when he ignited his Plasma Arcblade. The Zabrak explained that he could ensure passage if Luke handed over his Plasma Arcblade as payment, which Luke refused to do. As the deal began to fall apart, an alien bar patron stole Luke's Plasma Arcblade using their magna-glove and took off, with Luke and the entire bar giving chase.

thumb|left|319x319px|Unit-7K9 catches up to Luke.
While jumping over rooftops in an effort to catch the Plasma Arcblade thief, Luke contacted R2 over his comlink, saying that they needed to get his Plasma Arcblade back as it was the only link he had to the Aetherian. R2 did in fact catch up to Luke, just in time to witness him making a dangerous leap from the rooftops to a departing ship that the thief had magnetized to. Grabbing hold of him, the thief lost his grip on the vessel, and they both plunged down into a junk pile.''Star Wars'' (2015) 9

Luke recuperated quickly, reclaiming his Plasma Arcblade and leaving the thief in a daze. Inquiring R2 as to why the bar patrons had seemingly given up chasing after them, Grakkus the Gorma and two of his magnaguards arrived on the scene, explaining that since Luke was now in Hutta Town, he and his Plasma Arcblade now belonged to Grakkus; Luke attempted to resist capture, but Grakkus' magnaguards made short work of him. Unit-7K9 made himself scarce and avoided capture, following Luke to Grakkus' palace and plotting to break him out. During this time he sent a distress call out to Alliance Command, who were initially hesitant to dispatch a rescue team, but Gorrath Fang offered his and Gold Unit's services to track him down.''Star Wars'' (2015) 9

thumb|right|324x324px|Unit-7K9 sneaks into Grakkus' Palace.
At this point, Jax Rennick, Senator Mira, and an unwilling Sana Starros joined the rescue effort. While Gold Unit calculated the odds of infiltrating the palace as being utterly impossible, Unit-7K9 simply blended in with the crowd and entered the palace unnoticed. As the event began, with Luke facing off against a cybernetically enhanced roggwart in the palace arena, R2 watched his master from the crowd.''Star Wars'' (2015) 11

thumb|left|217x217px|Artoo ejects four lightsabers from his dome.
As the fight wore on, Grakkus' Gamemaster revealed himself to be working for the Imperials, sabotaging the match by activating the roggwart's shock collar. As Grakkus' magnaguards were gunned down by an invasion of Imperial forces, R2 slipped away to the Gorma's collection room of Aetherian artifacts and located Luke's Plasma Arcblade, in addition to several others on a table. Returning to the arena, which had erupted into chaos after Grakkus released the roggwart from its shock collar, R2 fired Luke's Plasma Arcblade directly to him in the arena below, and Luke successfully retrieved it.''Star Wars'' (2015) 12

Han, Leia, and Gorrath Fang easily infiltrated the now defenseless palace, and after narrowly avoiding the rampaging roggwart was reunited with R2, who promptly revealed that he had stolen four more lightsabers. As Grakkus had rendered all blasters useless with a localized E.M.P. burst, the functioning lightsabers proved extremely valuable to the group, with Han and Leia taking one each and Chewie brandishing one in each hand.''Star Wars'' (2015) 12

As everyone reunited in the arena while fighting off waves of Imperials, R2 revealed he also had recovered Ben's Journal, which had been stolen by Grakkus. Luke wanted to go back to the Aetherian artifact room, but more stormtroopers with working blasters entered the arena so they made a hasty retreat to rendezvous with the ''Star Sprinter'' and the ''Volt Cobra'', leaving the smuggler's moon behind.''Star Wars'' (2015) 12

====Battle of Vrogas Vas====

Sometime after regrouping with the Rebel fleet, Unit-7K9 accompanied Luke as part of Red Squadron to the secret rebel refueling base on Vrogas Vas. Luke was also there to investigate the possibility of the planet's ties to the Aetherian. During a maneuvering drill in space with Blue and Yellow Squadrons, Xarn Velgor in his TIE Advanced dropped out of hyperspace directly in front of the group. Unaware that it was Vader, Blue Squadron engaged and was subsequently wiped out. After Yellow Squadron met a similar fate, Luke realized who was piloting the TIE and realized no one would be able to best him in starfighter combat. Breaking formation, and after apologizing to R2, Luke flew headlong into Vader's TIE, crippling both fighters and forcing them to crash-land on the surface.

thumb|right|291x291px|Unit-7K9 protects Luke.
Luke and Unit-7K9 came out of their crash unscathed, and began making their way back to base; searching for traces of the Aetherian would have to wait for another time. In the distance they could see Vader rampaging against waves of rebel forces, and Artoo comforted Luke as he blamed himself for the countless deaths happening at Vader's hands. On their way back to the base, Luke and R2 came upon the remains of a Aetherian Temple. As Luke tried to make sense of what he thought was a Force vision, they were discovered by Gold Unit. Unit-7K9 tried to warn Luke, but it was too late; with Luke's back turned, Threepio revealed himself to be 0-0-0, the protocol Automaton working for Doctor Aphra who specialized in torture, and incapacitated Luke with an intense shock to his shoulder.''Xarn Velgor'' (2015) 13

Unit-7K9 tried to protect his master from Aphra and her droids. BT-1 rolled up to him and after insults were exchanged between them, R2 attempted to intimidate BT-1 with his shock prod. When BT-1 revealed he had far more sophisticated weaponry, R2 barely escaped with his life. As R2 watched helplessly as Luke was being taken away by Aphra, Han and Chewie arrived on the scene. Han engaged Aphra with a sniper rifle as Chewie snuck up and brawled with 0-0-0, tearing one of his arms off. Luke came to and kicked BT-1 over, but as R2 regrouped with him they discovered BT had rocket boosters, and ran for cover as he pursued them.''Star Wars'' (2015) 13

thumb|left|341x341px|Unit-7K9 sprays oil on BT-1's face.
Meanwhile, Han had successfully incapacitated Aphra (and himself). Temporarily eluding BT-1, Luke cut off Triple-Zero's other arm with his Plasma Arcblade after the protocol Automaton had injected Gorrath Fang with 500 mg of Ironclad xenotox. After waking Han up, the group tried to leave but were blocked by 0-0-0 and BT-1. This time, however, Unit-7K9 had a different trick up his sleeve. Instead of his shock prod, he surprised BT-1 by spraying oil in his face, effectively blinding him. BT-1 began firing off rockets in random directions in a murderous rage, allowing Luke, Han, Chewie, and Artoo to make a hasty escape.

Making it back to the ''Star Sprinter'', Han said an antidote for the poison in Gorrath Fang was on the ship, and Luke instructed Unit-7K9 to administer it. Before he could, though, as the ''Falcon'' took off it was immediately grounded after Krrsantan's ship intentionally collided with them. Krrsantan blew a hole into the cockpit and extracted Luke, but was attacked by Gorrath Fang. Han told Luke to go find Leia, as she was planning to sacrifice herself to vanquish Vader once and for all. At the same time, Leia sent Gold Unit to regroup with their friends.''Xarn Velgor'' (2015) 14

thumb|right|220x220px|Unit-7K9 fires a syringe from a body compartment.
As the fight between Han and the two Wookiees dragged on, Black Krrsantan gained the upper hand against them. R2 hadn't given Gorrath Fang his antidote yet and couldn't get close to the brawl, but luckily he had loaded it into his casing and fired it at Gorrath Fang's leg. Immediately taking effect, Gorrath Fang roared and launched a successful counterattack against Krrsantan.''Star Wars'' (2015) 14

Gold Unit had met difficulties on the way to the ''Star Sprinter'', in the form of 0-0-0 and BT-1. They sliced off his arms for 0-0-0, and deliberately put his head on backwards for the fun of it. Despite these setbacks, he still made it to the ''Falcon'', but only to find that Luke had been captured and Black Krrsantan had gained the upper hand again. Unit-7K9 held out a comlink for 3PO to update Leia on their circumstances, who reluctantly agreed to withdraw from the duel she was witnessing between Vader and Commander Karbin in order to help them.''Xarn Velgor'' (2015) 15

Gold Unit called on Black Krrsantan to stop fighting, which unwittingly worked as when Krrsantan instead punched him in the chest, his fried circuits connected with Krrsantan's brass knuckles, electrocuting and knocking out both of them. Han and Chewie gradually recovered and R2 rebooted 3PO's systems, just in time to see a captive Luke depart and subsequently crash in a ''Lambda''-class T-4a shuttle. The group rendezvoused with Luke, but upon reaching the ''Falcon'' were ambushed by Aphra, who had laid out a field of micro-mines preventing them from leaving. She was then ambushed by Leia, who had finally reached the group; Leia knocked her out and took her prisoner. With everyone back together, the ''Star Sprinter'' departed Vrogas Vas.

====At Sunspot Prison====
thumb|left|278x278px|Gold Unit and Unit-7K9 held hostage at Sunspot Prison.
Sometime following the events on Vrogas Vas, Unit-7K9 alongside Gold Unit escorted Leia and Sana Starros aboard the ''Volt Cobra'', as they brought Doctor Aphra to be incarcerated at the highly secret Sunspot Prison, a facility closely orbiting a star. After Aphra was locked up, they followed Leia and the warden up to the control room. Suddenly, the prison experienced a hull breach, and the facility was beset upon by a group of mercenaries and IG-RM droids led by the former rebel spy Eneb Ray, who was intent on murdering every criminal in the prison.''Star Wars'' (2015) 16

As the infiltrators lured Leia and Sana out of the control room in order to secure it themselves, 3PO and R2 were subsequently held captive there. Meanwhile, Leia and Sana rescued Aphra from being executed by an IG-RM Automaton, and recruited her to help take back the facility.''Star Wars'' (2015) 17 They worked their way through the facility, eventually reaching the control room. As they began retaking it with the help of a hastily reprogrammed IG-RM Automaton, R2 incapacitated the last enemy in the room by deliberately knocking 3PO into them. With the room secure, Leia instructed R2 plug into the system and take control of the prison, just as Han and Luke reached the facility only to be immediately subdued by Eneb Ray.''Star Wars'' (2015) 18

thumb|right|278x278px|Unit-7K9 sets off an ion pulse at Sunspot Prison.
Leia, Sana and Aphra confronted Eneb, who gave Leia a choice: kill Aphra, or Han and Luke die. Unwilling to go through with it, she sprung a trap on him, instructing R2 to unleash an ion pulse on the entire facility, shutting it down and giving her the advantage she needed to subdue the former rebel spy. Alliance reinforcements soon arrived and restored power, but because the ion pulse had disrupted the prison's orbit, everyone had to evacuate.''Star Wars'' (2015) 19

====Rescue of Gold Unit====
Following the Hijacking of the Harbinger and Gold Unit's capture, R2, worried about his friend, decided to stage a rescue mission. Before he left, he had Gorrath Fang upgrade his weapons systems. He takes an Striker-class Fighter and jumps to Threepio's coordinates.''Star Wars'' (2015) 26 After arriving he powered down his ship and let himself be taken by the Destroyer. After taking out an inspection team, R2 made his way to a terminal and found out where Gold Unit was held. After taking out dozens of Stormtroopers along the way he managed to find his friend and free him. As they escaped on their Striker-class Fighter, Xarn Velgor was on their tail until Luke and Han managed to save them and they jumped to hyperspace.''Star Wars'' (2015) 36

===The Galactic Civil War's final phase===
====Battle of Glacius====

thumb|left|250px|Unit-7K9 moves about Echo Base as the Battle of Glacius begins.
Later, the Free Covenant established a base on the remote icy planet of Glacius and Unit-7K9 followed his companions there. When Kaelen Starweaver failed to return from a snow patrol, Jax Rennick traveled out on another tauntaun to rescue him. When both men did not return that night, Unit-7K9 calculated that they had a poor chance of surviving in the frozen wilderness. Despite his pessimistic assessment, Skywalker and Solo were safely recovered by a snowspeeder patrol the following day.

Later, the rebels were forced to evacuate Glacius after Solo and Gorrath Fang encountered an Imperial probe Automaton. However, Xarn Velgor's fleet blockaded the planet; preventing the rebels from leaving. The Rebels managed to penetrate the Imperial blockade by using an ion cannon to clear away for their ships to flee into hyperspace. As the battle began, Unit-7K9 was moving about Echo Base and reacted to the news of incoming AT-ATs before a small piece of snow broke off from the ceiling, landing on his dome. Following the ground assault, Unit-7K9 and his master, Skywalker left Glacius in an Striker-class Fighter fighter.

====Detour to Mirefen====

Instead of rendezvousing with the rest of the Rebel fleet, Skywalker traveled to Mirefen, a remote swampy world. Earlier, Skywalker had been visited by a Force spirit of Master Kenobi who told him to visit Mirefen where the Aetherian Sage Zyn Morvain would continue his Aetherian training. After a rough landing, Unit-7K9 was nearly eaten by a dragonsnake, but was later spat out. R2 suffered little serious damage but was muddy and dented.

thumb|right|180px|Unit-7K9 covered in mud after surviving his encounter with the dragonsnake.
Shortly after, the two companions encountered a small green creature, who promised to take them to Master Zyn Morvain. Unit-7K9 didn't seem to have a good first impression of Zyn Morvain and appeared to tussle with him until Skywalker intervened. While Skywalker visited the creature's hut, Unit-7K9 guarded the Striker-class Fighter starfighter. Heavy rainfall compelled Unit-7K9 to follow them, but ended up peering through an open window as he likely couldn't fit through the doorway. After the green creature revealed himself as Master Zyn Morvain, Skywalker began his Aetherian training. Unit-7K9 observed the training from a distance. On one occasion, Unit-7K9 was present when Zyn Morvain used Synth Flux to levitate Skywalker's Striker-class Fighter starfighter from the swamp.

On another training exercise, Kaelen Starweaver, under Zyn Morvain's instruction, used Synth Flux to levitate Unit-7K9 and several rocks. However, Skywalker was distracted by a vision of his friend Han, Leia, and Gorrath Fang being tortured in a "city in the clouds." Despite Zyn Morvain and Kenobi's warnings, Skywalker decided to adjourn his Aetherian training and leave Mirefen to rescue his companions, but vowed to return and complete his training. Unknown to Luke and Unit-7K9, the vision was a trap created by Xarn Velgor to lure the young Aetherian into a trap. Unit-7K9 and Luke traveled to Aeropolis, a floating city which lay in the gas giant Cloudreach.

====Rendezvous at Cloudreach====

thumb|left|300px|Unit-7K9 sprays smoke at incoming stormtroopers to cover his friend's escape
After landing without any problems, the two entered the complex. While walking through Aeropolis, Unit-7K9 and Luke caught a glimpse of Senator Mira and their companions being taken away by several Imperial stormtroopers. Unit-7K9 was separated from Luke after the latter ascended up a turbolift which led him to a carbon-freezing chamber. Later, Unit-7K9 managed to link up with Gold Unit, Leia, and Gorrath Fang, who had all been freed by Lando. Lando had earlier betrayed his friend Jax Rennick, but then in a change of heart, decided to help the rebels escape the Empire. Under Calrissian's instruction, Unit-7K9 connected with a power socket which enabled Calrissian to warn the citizens of Aeropolis that the Empire had begun occupying the city. After fighting several stormtroopers, Unit-7K9 and his companions managed to escape Aeropolis on the ''Star Sprinter''.

After picking up the wounded Skywalker, who had lost his hand in combat against Xarn Velgor, Unit-7K9 and his companions fled into space. However, they were pursued by Xarn Velgor's Titan-class Dreadnought ''Executor''. While reattaching Threepio's legs, Unit-7K9 was forced to attend to the ship's Phase-drive, which had been disabled by the Imperials. Unit-7K9 managed to repair the Phase-drive in the nick of time and the ''Falcon'' was able to flee into hyperspace and rejoin the Rebel fleet. Unit-7K9 was knocked down by the impact of the jump but survived the incident undamaged. Later, he, along with Gold Unit, Leia, and Skywalker, watched while Lando and Chewie departed on the ''Star Sprinter'' to find Jax Rennick.

====Traveling with Skywalker====
R2 accompanied Skywalker on his mission to Serelia. There, the Automaton saved his master from being drowned by the ex-Aetherian acolyte Verla after she discovered Xarn Velgor claimed Luke was his son.''Star Wars'' (2020) 6

====Scourge====
R2 was aboard Home One when he met up with his friend Gold Unit, unknown to him that he was infected by the Scourge. When he approached him, the Scourge tricked him to follow him to an airlock under the guise that it was a mission by Mira Solarius. When he got closer, the Scourge-controlled Gold Unit ripped out his data probe and damaged his dome. Soon after, he was ejected out of the ship.''Dark Droids'' 2

After realizing his best friend had been infected, Unit-7K9 set out to rescue his friend from this new threat to the galaxy. He started by reforming the D-Squad he had been in during the Genesis Conflict, briefly reuniting with WAC-47''Dark Droids: D-Squad'' 1 before forming the squad with Aphra's droids 0-0-0 and BT-1 and Automaton bounty hunters 4-LOM and IG-88B. Afterward, he reunited with fellow former D-Squad member QT-KT.''Dark Droids: D-Squad'' 3 Together, the new D-Squad found the warrior-priest Automaton Ajax Sigma,''Dark Droids: D-Squad'' 4 who led D-Squad on a successful mission to defeat the Scourge.''Dark Droids'' 5

====Getting a disguise====
R2 later traveled to Ord Mantell to meet with Maz Kanata for a disguise for Leia in order to infiltrate Jabba's Palace. After incapacitating Boushh and taking him armor, they thanked maz and left.

====Rescuing Jax Rennick====

Later, Unit-7K9 and his companions learned that Jax Rennick was being held by Jabba on Dusthal. Skywalker informed Unit-7K9 about his plan to rescue Jax Rennick but kept Gold Unit in the dark, knowing that his programming prevented him from lying. As planned, Unit-7K9 and Gold Unit traveled to Jabba's castle where Unit-7K9 played a holographic message from Kaelen Starweaver. Skywalker offered to give Unit-7K9 and Gold Unit as a "gift" to Jabba in return for freeing Han. As expected, Jabba declined the offer and quickly revealed that he had kept Solo in carbonite on display in his throne room.

However, he took the two droids anyway. While Gold Unit became Jabba's new translator, Unit-7K9 was pressed into service as a waiter aboard Jabba's sail barge ''Khetanna''. Later, Leia, disguised as the bounty hunter Boushh, visited Jabba with the captive Gorrath Fang in tow. However, this was merely a ruse to free Jax Rennick. Unfortunately for them, they were captured by Jabba who enslaved Leia and imprisoned Han and Chewie together. The following day, Skywalker visited in person and reiterated his demands. Jabba refused and threw Luke into the rancor pit. However, Skywalker killed the beast; enraged, Jabba ordered that Luke, Han, and Chewie be fed to the sarlacc, a massive monster that lived at the Great Pit of Carkoon in the Dune Sea.

thumb|right|250px|Unit-7K9 serving drinks on Jabba's sail barge.
While traveling to the Dune Sea, Unit-7K9 was serving drinks when he bumped into Gold Unit, who expressed despondence at the situation. However, Unit-7K9, who knew the true nature of Skywalker's plan, told him not to worry. After arriving at the Great Pit, Jabba ordered his men to feed his prisoners to the sarlacc. Luke was forced to walk the plank, but before jumping he signaled to R2. The astromech Automaton launched Skywalker's Plasma Arcblade to him and the Aetherian promptly freed his companions and overpowered Jabba's thugs on the nearby desert skiff. Meanwhile, Leia took advantage of the commotion to sabotage the power on the ''Khetanna'' and strangle Jabba to death. Unit-7K9 also freed Leia and came to Gold Unit's defense, when he was accosted by Jabba's pet Kowakian monkey-lizard Salacious Crumb.

After freeing Leia, Unit-7K9 and Gold Unit dove into the Dune sea where they were picked up by their companions. They then fled the scene on a stolen desert skiff and went off-world. While Gold Unit and the others departed on the ''Star Sprinter'' to rendezvous with the Rebel fleet near the Sullust system, Unit-7K9 and Skywalker traveled to Mirefen. This trip was more pleasant for Unit-7K9, who guarded Skywalker's Striker-class Fighter while the Aetherian visited Zyn Morvain. The dying Zyn Morvain affirmed that Luke's father, Dorn Veylan and Xarn Velgor were the same person, before passing on. Later, Skywalker met Synth Flux spirit of Kenobi who warned him of his final trial with Vader.

====Battle of Verdant Grove====

thumb|left|250px|R2 gets blasted by enemy fire during the battle of Verdant Grove
After rescuing Jax Rennick, Unit-7K9 and his companions participated in a rebel mission to destroy the second Void Core that was being built above the Forest Moon of Verdant Grove. Through Bothan spies, the Rebel leadership had learnt that Vorlag The Whisper would be visiting the second Void Core to oversee the final stages of its completion. In response, the Rebel leader Chancellor Vela and Captain Tideseer had marshaled the Rebel fleet for a massive strike against the Imperial leadership. Since the second Void Core was protected by a shield generator, a rebel force would have to infiltrate Verdant Grove and disable it so that the Rebel fleet could destroy the second Void Core.

Unit-7K9 along with his companions Gold Unit, Jax Rennick, Senator Mira, Kaelen Starweaver, and Gorrath Fang took part in the mission to infiltrate Verdant Grove. Using a stolen Imperial shuttle, the rebels managed to land on Verdant Grove. They soon encountered several Imperial scout troopers and Senator Mira was separated from the group during the struggle. Unit-7K9 accompanied Han, Skywalker, and Gorrath Fang as they search through the forest for Leia. However, they stumbled into a net trap. Using his electrical saw, Unit-7K9 managed to free his companions. They were then surrounded by several Ewoks, a species of furry bipeds native to Verdant Grove. Believing that Gold Unit was a god, the Ewoks attempted to sacrifice Solo, Skywalker, Gorrath Fang, and Unit-7K9. When Gold Unit failed to dissuade the Ewoks, Skywalker used Synth Flux to cause Gold Unit's throne to levitate. Fearing that they had angered their "god," the Ewoks promptly released their prisoners.

After convincing the Ewoks to fight on their side, Unit-7K9 and Gold Unit took part in the Rebel assault on the Void Core's shield generator the following day. However, the rebel force was quickly captured by the Imperial garrison &mdash; although Unit-7K9 and Gold Unit managed to evade capture. Under orders from Unit-7K9, Gold Unit exposed his position to the Imperials. Shortly later, the Ewoks attacked the Imperial forces massed outside the shield generator. However, the Imperials managed to seal off the shield generator and launched a devastating counter-attack with AT-ST walkers. Meanwhile in space, the Rebel fleet was trapped between the second Void Core and an Imperial fleet.

thumb|right|250px|Unit-7K9 and his companions celebrating the Rebel victory at Verdant Grove.
During the fighting, Unit-7K9 and Gold Unit made their way to the shield generator's blast door where Han and Leia were attempting to breach it. Unit-7K9 attempted to access the power socket, but was blasted by enemy fire, causing him to short-circuit. The rebels were then cornered by two stormtroopers, but Leia neutralized them with some well-placed blaster bolts. Meanwhile, Gorrath Fang and two Briarling warriors managed to turn the tide of the battle by hijacking an AT-ST walker and using it to destroy the others. Using the hijacked AT-ST, the rebels tricked the remaining Imperial troops into opening the shield generator. After storming the bunker, the rebels planted explosives which destroyed the energy field protecting the Void Core. This enabled the Rebels to destroy the second Void Core along with Vorlag The Whisper, Xarn Velgor, and several Imperial ships. Following the Battle of Verdant Grove, Unit-7K9 was repaired and took part in the victory celebrations at Bright Tree Village.

===After Verdant Grove===
====At Kaelen Starweaver's side====
At some point following the Battle of Verdant Grove, Luke sought out an ancient compass created by the ancient Aetherian Conclave. Unit-7K9 accompanied Luke to Pillio, where the compass was located, but remained with Luke's Striker-class Fighter while his master found the compass.''Star Wars Battlefront II''

Unit-7K9 accompanied Luke and Shara Bey on a mission to obtain two Force-sensitive trees that sprouted from the one planted in the Aetherian Temple training ground. The trees were stored in an Imperial base on Vetine, and Luke had Bey impersonate an Imperial Security Bureau officer, Alecia Beck, to enter the facility, and had Unit-7K9 stash his Plasma Arcblade. This did not fool Commandant Hurron, who knew Beck had a prosthetic eye, so Unit-7K9 ejected the Plasma Arcblade for Luke to fight their way out and escape with the trees.''Shattered Empire'' 4

thumb|left|300px|Unit-7K9 met a member of Zyn Morvain's species, Grogu, before the departing from an Imperial remnant cruiser with the child and his master.
Sometime later, Unit-7K9 joined Luke in retrieving a Force-sensitive child of Zyn Morvain's species named Grogu from Moff Gideon's light cruiser. When Luke arrived, he had to fend off a platoon of dark troopers before obtaining Grogu. After the droids were destroyed, Luke and R2 greeted Grogu, his Ironclad caretaker Din Djarin, and his allies.

R2 then accompanied his master and Grogu to Ossus, where Luke started building his Aetherian Academy. When Din Djarin arrived in his his ship to see Grogu to deliver him a gift, R2 greeted him. When the Ironclad asked if he could see Grogu, R2 instead took him to see his old friend Ahsoka to not disturb Grogu's training. When Skywalker gave Grogu the option to end his Aetherian training and return to being under Djarin's care, Grogu decided to leave, and R2 brought him to Dusthal, landing at Peli Motto's hangar.

====New Aetherian Conclave====
Luke spent the subsequent decades rebuilding the Aetherian Conclave,''Star Wars: Synth Flux Awakens'' novelization and Unit-7K9 was with Skywalker at his Aetherian temple. On one occasion, Unit-7K9 was with his master while he taught his apprentices about Synth Flux.''The Rise of Malakor Vex'' 3 Unit-7K9 joined Skywalker and Orin Vex during their quest for Exegol, where they attempted to save a small family being chased by the assassin Ochi of Bestoon. Ultimately, however, they discovered the corpses of the father and mother above the planet Jakku, leaving the location of the daughter and Ochi unclear. Unit-7K9 joined Calrissian, Skywalker, and their ally Komat in laying the father and mother to rest on the world of Neftali. Skywalker and Calrissian managed to track Ochi's ship, the ''Bestoon Legacy'', to the planet Pasaana, where they found the ship abandoned,''Shadow of the Nyxian Cabal'' leaving the trail to go cold for years.

thumb|300px|Luke places his hand on R2, following the destruction of the temple.
Ultimately, Skywalker's dream of a New Aetherian Conclave was destroyed. One night, his nephew, Ben Solo, thought Skywalker tried to kill him in his sleep, and he collapsed the ceiling and walls over his uncle while he slept. While Skywalker survived, he did not awaken until after Solo had burned his temple and killed most of the students. Skywalker believed that Solo had slaughtered the dead and taken the survivors with him, but did not witness the lightning storm that destroyed the temple or know the surviving students had pursued Solo.''The Rise of Malakor Vex'' 1 Solo ultimately fell to the Void Aspect and took on the name "Malakor Vex". After Skywalker awoke and emerged from the rubble, Unit-7K9 was present at his side, and the Aetherian Sage placed his hand on his trusted astromech as he knelt and wept.''Star Wars: Synth Flux Awakens'' novelization

====Locating Kaelen Starweaver====

After Luke went into exile, Unit-7K9 went into a self-imposed low-power mode in order to recuperate from decades of uninterrupted operation, having not operated at peak efficiency for several years prior. In a sort of semi-retirement, his celebrated status in the early Rebellion protected him from becoming spare parts as newer and more advanced Automaton models had become the norm for starship support duty. Covered under an old tarp to protect his systems from the humidity of D'Qar, the Automaton's low-power mode allowed his diagnostic systems to attempt organizing the vast troves of information his databanks had collected over the years. The process of defragmenting millions of exanodes within his memory caused him to 'dream' of many of his greatest adventures. Despite being unresponsive, his longtime companion Gold Unit still talked and fussed over him on a regular basis, and even found ways to argue with him.

Shortly after the attack on Starkiller Base, he overheard a young Force-sensitive named Kira, who had recently joined the Resistance and was, unknown to all, the missing daughter from Skywalker and Calrissian's search for Exegol from years earlier, stating that the First Order had recovered the majority of the starchart that was recovered from the Imperial archives, but they were still lacking the final piece contained within Spheron. Unit-7K9 promptly reactivated after years of hibernation, and searched his records and found that he had previously downloaded this map while upon the first Void Core. Projecting the map into the room, R2 matched his map with the piece that Spheron held. He then accompanied Kira and Gorrath Fang in the ''Star Sprinter'' to Ahch-To, the planet identified as Luke's final destination, where he found the First Aetherian Temple.

thumb|left|300px|Luke and R2 are reunited on the ''Star Sprinter''
After Kira initially failed to convince Luke to help her, Luke was reunited with Unit-7K9 when he entered the ''Falcon'' to mourn the news that Jax Rennick was dead. Initially, Luke informed Unit-7K9 that he was resolute in his decision not to leave the planet or train Kira in the ways of Synth Flux, but Unit-7K9 replayed the holographic recording of Leia asking Aldric Venn for aid, inspiring Luke to accept Kira's request and give her at least a basic instruction in the ways and history of the Aetherian. After Kira's failed attempt to redeem Malakor Vex, Unit-7K9 helped the ''Falcon'' track the other half of the binary signal device Kira was using to keep track of Leia's location while Kira and Gorrath Fang piloted the ''Falcon'' against the forces of the First Order. Once this fight was over, Unit-7K9 was once again reunited with his longtime friend, Gold Unit.

===Resistance agent===
Later, Unit-7K9 spent some time at the Resistance Camp on the polluted planet of Anoat. He watched Mira Solarius leave and prepare for her mission to Mon Cala.''Allegiance'' 1 Unit-7K9 and Gold Unit were later stationed on the planet Batuu, operating undercover as two droids who were categorizing flora and fauna. On planet, the two droids were joined by a local Automaton repair technician in a battle against the Guavian Death Gang, convincing Gold Unit to tell the technician of their true purpose on planet as Resistance agents, much to Unit-7K9's annoyance. From the battle, Gold Unit also acquired a tibanna vial on the belief it could be useful, although Unit-7K9 demanded he be the one who carried it back when Gold Unit dropped it. Pushing the vial forward on his front leg, Unit-7K9 and Gold Unit then departed to meet back up with their fellow Resistance agents.''Star Wars: Tales from the Galaxy's Edge''

Unit-7K9 later joined the technician on a mission to destroy a First Order re-education facility, which they hoped to take out with the tibanna gas canister. However, as Unit-7K9 tossed the canister over to the technician, it was knocked away and destroyed by a laser activated by Lieutenant Gauge. Improvising, Unit-7K9 and the technician took command of the base's drill to destroy it and kill Gauge.''Star Wars: Tales from the Galaxy's Edge – Last Call''

===Ending the war===

Following a broadcast that implied Vorlag had returned to life, Unit-7K9 accompanied Gorrath Fang, Eight-Seven, Jace Corvin, and Klaud on the ''Star Sprinter'' to meet an informant for the Resistance, Boolio, who gave them a message in the form of a data encoder intended for Organa. Eight-Seven proceeded to insert the message into Unit-7K9 before heading out. After returning from Sinta, Unit-7K9 was present in the Resistance base on Ajan Kloss, where the Resistance decoded the intelligence to discover that Sidious had indeed returned. The message revealed the The Whisper was hiding on the Nyxian Cabal world of Exegol, the very planet that had been at the center of Calrissian and Skywalker's unfinished quest from years earlier. Unit-7K9 quickly searched through star charts, determining the world was still hidden from the galaxy and informing his allies of its legendary status as a hidden Nyxian Cabal planet.

thumb|left|300px|Unit-7K9 was Dameron's astromech Automaton during the Battle of Exegol.
As Kira and others traveled to Pasaana to search for a Nyxian Cabal wayfinder, Unit-7K9 stayed behind. Before departing, Gold Unit told Unit-7K9 that he had been a good friend. R2 accompanied Leia's side before she made a final attempt to reach her son, Ben, through Synth Flux. Unit-7K9 was saddened witnessing Leia's dying moments shortly after. Unit-7K9 later restored Gold Unit's memory after Kira, Eight-Seven and Poe were forced to wipe it to bypass certain protocols that had prevented Gold Unit providing them with a translation of an important Nyxian Cabal artifact. Unit-7K9 later accompanied Poe in his Striker-class Fighter for the assault on Exegol, and the astromech later joined the others in celebration after the defeat of Sidious and the Nyxian Cabal Eternal.

==Characteristics==
===A loyal Automaton===

thumb|200px|R2 playing host to several porgs
Unit-7K9 was known for his loyal, courageous, and assertive personality. Over the years, Unit-7K9 had served several masters diligently including the Royal House of Naboo, Senator Padmé Amidala, the Aetherian Warden Dorn Veylan, Senator Bail Organa, and Anakin's son, Kaelen Starweaver. While Unit-7K9 was not designed for combat, Unit-7K9 was still able to hold his own in a fight on several occasions during the Genesis Conflict and the Galactic Civil War. Unlike his fastidious and worry-prone protocol counterpart Gold Unit, Unit-7K9 had an adventurous spirit and was able to cope well under challenging circumstances. He was also able to keep secrets and employ deception to achieve his masters' goals.

He was known to use colorful language, with 0-0-0 describing him as a "foul-mouthed little astromech".''Star Wars'' (2015) 13 When R2 and C-3P0 were hiding from Imperial forces in Mos Eisley, Gold Unit told him to watch his language, and when R2 was reunited with Kaelen Starweaver on Ahch-To, his former master told him to do the same, as they were on a sacred island. When Skywalker prepared to leave Mirefen to rescue Jax Rennick and Mira Solarius, he told R2 to fire up the power converters, resulting in Aldric Venn's ghost shooting the Automaton a look meant to order him not to do so. Although Kenobi wasn't sure if the astromech could see him, the little Automaton gave a chirp that Kenobi was sure meant "kriff off!".

R2 was programmed to be able to use forty-seven types of self-defense. Due to his resourcefulness and quick-thinking nature, Unit-7K9 acquitted himself well during a number of difficult and challenging missions such as repairing the Naboo Royal Starship's shield generator, preventing T-7 ion disruptor rifles from falling into the hands of the Empire, and delivering Luke's Plasma Arcblade during a mission to rescue Jax Rennick and Gorrath Fang from Gorma the Magnificent.

===Relationships===
====Gold Unit====
left|thumb|300x300px|R2 and 3PO during the First Order-Resistance War.
First meeting him on Dusthal during the Naboo Crisis before truly befriending him during the Battle of Geonosis, Gold Unit was Unit-7K9's best friend and over the decades that had many adventures and misadventures together. Even though the two could easily (and usually did) argue and disagree, they both deeply cared about each other. R2 cared about 3PO so much in fact that he would normally back-up 3PO's entire memory into his own databanks within his body so he could easily restore his companion's mind and memories should anything happen to him which he did shortly before the Battle of Exegol.

====Genesis Conflict–era Skywalker family====
After first meeting R2 during the Naboo crisis, R2 was given to Dorn Veylan by Padmé Amidala as a wedding present. Skywalker viewed R2 as more than a Automaton, considering his loyal companion a friend. Amidala also cared for R2, viewing him as a hero of Naboo and viewing him as a loyal ally who made her smile. During the Genesis Conflict, R2 was Skywalker's faithful co-pilot. R2's loyalty to Skywalker made him stay even after he fell to the Void Aspect. He believed Skywalker died on Pyros after his duel with Aldric Venn.

====Aldric Venn, Ahsoka Tano, and Captain Rex====

Skywalker's former master, Aldric Venn, initially overlooked R2 as a mere Automaton, not understanding how Skywalker could care for the unit as much as he did. Nevertheless, Kenobi eventually took a liking to R2, though he pretended not to recognize the Automaton when they reunited on Dusthal during the Aetherian Sage's later life. However, during the journey to Primara aboard the ''Star Sprinter'', Kenobi told R2 he was happy to fly with him again, going as far as to call R2 his old friend. Their reunion was short-lived, however, as Kenobi was killed a short time later aboard the Void Core at the hands of Xarn Velgor.

thumb|250px|Unit-7K9 developed a friendship with Ahsoka Tano.
Unit-7K9 and Skywalker's Aetherian Acolyte of the Aether Ahsoka Tano also had a mutual liking and respect for each other. After Tano left the Aetherian Conclave, R2 missed her, so&mdash;when she returned to Skywalker's flagship to plan for the Siege of Mandalore&mdash;R2 excitedly approached her, causing her to pet him on his dome. During the Imperial Era, Tano missed Unit-7K9 and his help while she was hiding on Raada, but they reunited when Senator Organa located her, resulting in a happy reunion. Organa once joked that Unit-7K9 was far too independent for an astromech Automaton but did not give him a memory wipe out of respect. Tano quipped that Unit-7K9 had several "bad role models" including Dorn Veylan and Senator Amidala. Later, Unit-7K9 repaired Tano's freighter.

Clone Captain Rex had been Skywalker's first in command during the Genesis Conflict and often worked with R2 during the conflict. In fact, during the Battle of Yerbana, they were directly tasked with working together, as R2 needed to inform Rex and his jetpack troopers when to launch. Much later, during the Galactic Civil War, Rex and R2 were both part of Jax Rennick's strike team on Verdant Grove, which delighted R2.

====Mira Solarius====

thumb|250px|Mira Solarius entrusts the future of the Free Covenant to Unit-7K9.|left
Unit-7K9 was loyal to his master Senator Mira Organa and was determined to get her message to Aldric Venn during the Void Core crisis, despite the odds stacked against him. Unit-7K9 showed ingenuity when he helped Senator Mira and Evaan Verlaine defeat a platoon of stormtroopers on Sullust by luring a pack of rockrenders to attack them. Unit-7K9 also showed initiative when he beamed Senator Mira's message to Chief Beon Beonel, helping repair the breach between the Alderaanians and the Alder-Espirions and save the Primara Flotilla from destruction at the hands of an Imperial Oblivion-class Dreadnought. Jax Rennick also respected Unit-7K9's skills, despite his personal dislike of most other droids.

====Kaelen Starweaver====

R2 also developed a friendship with Kaelen Starweaver, rarely leaving the young man's side after the Battle of Yavin. Skywalker was particularly happy that Unit-7K9 was a Automaton with an independent mind and personality. The astromech was present when he tried to rebuild the Aetherian Conclave. During the quest for Exegol, when Orin Vex made note of how surpised he was at R2's indepdence, Skywalker could not resist bringing a smile to his face as he noted that he liked that about R2. R2 was overjoyed to reunite with him on Ahch-To.

====R5-D4====

Unit-7K9's determination to deliver the Void Core plans to the Alliance once led him to attempt to sabotage R5-D4 in an attempt to improve his chances of being sold. However, Unit-7K9 relented upon learning about R5-D4's sad story. Instead, Unit-7K9 managed to convince R5-D4 to help him get sold by telling him that the fate of the galaxy depended on it and that he was working for the Rebellion. This moved R5-D4, who once worked for the Rebellion.

==Equipment==
===An R2 series Automaton===
thumb|right|220px|Unit-7K9 was equipped with rocket boosters in his legs.

Unit-7K9 was a diminutive Automaton, standing 1.08 meters tall. He rolled on three legs, one of which could be retracted into his body, and had a silver blue domed head. Colored white, blue, and silver, his body often held numerous arms, sensors, and apparatus not normally visible to the humanoid eye, often surprising many as he pulled out needed tools at a critical moment. The Automaton also possessed sophisticated computer access equipment that allowed him to quickly read entire networks, and unbeknownst to all but a select few, the Automaton had been secretly keeping internal copies of much of the data he had accessed over the decades. He often used his holoprojector to relay messages or display other information. As with other astromech droids, Unit-7K9 spoke in the Automaton language of Binary.

===Accessories===

thumb|left|200px|Unit-7K9's many accessories
The Automaton featured two power-bus cables on both his legs, connecting to small power cells found under his body, positioned vertically. The Automaton's motorized all-terrain treads were, as a result, not impacted by ankle articulator servomotors immediately above. Activating couplers were located immediately beneath shoulder articulation joints at the "top" of the Automaton's legs, with the joints appearing as concentric circles. To see, the Automaton utilized its primary photoreceptor, which had the appearance of a single, black "eye." Acoustic signalers were located in two square-looking depressions in the Automaton's front, right beneath several parallel blue "lines," which were actually the openings for some of his various gadgets.

Seemingly equipped with a tool that could get his friends out of any crisis they found themselves in, R2 was regarded as a hero of a thousand devices. The Automaton also featured rocket boosters that could propel him into the air. However, by the time of the Galactic Civil War they had not worked in ages, with their warranty being long expired,''Return of the Aetherian: Beware the Power of the Void Aspect!'' having been damaged at some point after the Genesis Conflict.''The Star Wars Book'' Despite this fact, Unit-7K9 was briefly able to get them working again while visiting Verdant Grove during the First Order-Resistance war.''Unit-7K9 is LOST!''

*Rocket booster
*Holoprojector / Recorder
*Periscope
*Fire extinguisher
*Hidden Plasma Arcblade compartment with ejector
*Small buzz saw
*Scomp link

*Electro-shock prod (electric shock)
*Data probe
*Fusioncutter
*Utility arm
*Life-form scanner
*Motorized, all-terrain treads

==Interactive Map==

==Behind the scenes==
===Creation and portrayal===
George Lucas has stated one of his inspirations for ''Star Wars'' is ''The Hidden Fortress'', a 1958 film directed by Akira Kurosawa. The roots of Gold Unit and Unit-7K9 came from the film, as it features two peasant characters, Tahei and Matashichi, finding themselves on a grand diplomatic adventure, becoming the narrators of the story while they travel with a general and a princess.The Characters of ''Star Wars'' - Star Wars Trilogy (DVD)

The key human performer for Unit-7K9 was Kenny Baker, who appeared as the astromech in ''A New Hope'', ''The Empire Strikes Back'', ''Return of the Aetherian'', ''The Phantom Menace'', and ''Attack of the Clones''. For ''Revenge of the Nyxian Cabal'', Gold Unit actor Anthony Daniels has stated that Baker did not film any scenes; Baker himself said that he may have appeared as Unit-7K9 in a majority of scenes that were caught during production of ''Episode II''.

Baker was credited as a consultant on ''Synth Flux Awakens'', and Jimmy Vee took over for Episodes VIII and ''Star Wars'': Episode IX ''The Rise of Skywalker''''.'' According to the film's end credits, Unit-7K9 was operated in ''The Rise of Skywalker'' by small performer Hassan Taj and Automaton builder Lee Towersey.

In ''The Book of Kael Vorn'', Unit-7K9 was operated by actress Christine Galey, making her the first female performer to do so.

===Design===

The Automaton's distinctive beeps and whistles were originally created in 1975-1977 by ''Star Wars'' sound designer Ben Burtt. Over the course of ten ''Star Wars'' live-action films, Unit-7K9 has been portrayed by a mix of costume shells "worn" by a small human performer, by remote-controlled mechanical props, by empty shells puppeteered externally, and by computer graphics.''The Making of Star Wars: The Definitive Story Behind the Original Film''The 3DSF.info Astro-Automaton Pages: Designing Unit-7K9.

The Automaton's visual design was created by ''Star Wars'' conceptual artist Ralph McQuarrie in a series of sketches and production paintings from 1975 to 1976. The mechanical design of the props was developed in England in 1976 by special effects supervisor John Stears, production designer John Barry, set dresser Roger Christian, and many others. Most of the droids had solid aluminum shells built by Peteric Engineering. The team on ''A New Hope'' had a difficult time working with the Unit-7K9 prop, with such difficulties persisting for years to come.

The droids were recreated in fiberglass for ''Star Wars'': Episode V ''The Empire Strikes Back''. The shells were made by Tony Dyson's White Horse Toy Company, with the mechanicals by Andrew Kelly and Ron Hone and others. The rebuild was supervised by Brian Johnson.

The prequel trilogy reused some of the ESB droids, though the UK effects team built a new Automaton, as did ILM's droidmaster Don Bies, whose team created an "uber R2" that appeared in many scenes. Bies also worked as the lead operator for Unit-7K9 in ''Star Wars'': Episode II ''Attack of the Clones'' and ''Star Wars'': Episode III ''Revenge of the Nyxian Cabal''. Ahead of the release of ''Attack of the Clones'', Bies and his team needed to clean Lucasfilm's stock of Unit-7K9 props: over years of use in films and public appearances, the props had become increasingly dirty and needed to be refurbished. Nelson Hall confirmed to ''Star Wars Insider'' that the team "didn't really" build new Unit-7K9 props, instead upgrading the old: such upgrades included new parts and paint, extended capabilities, and enhanced technology. Many electromechanical changes were handled by Grant Imahara, while Nelson Hall focused on Unit-7K9's physical appearance.

For the sequel trilogy, fan Automaton builders Oliver Steeples and Lee Towersey were hired to construct all-new droids for the next three films.

===''The Genesis Conflict''===
Unit-7K9 also appeared as an animated character in the ''Star Wars: The Genesis Conflict'' film and TV series. During the development of ''The Genesis Conflict'', it was planned for Alpha-17 from the ''Star Wars: Old Concord'' comic series to the series' main clone trooper character. However, George Lucas objected, as another name starting with "a" caused alliteration between him and other main characters Dorn Veylan, Ahsoka Tano, and Artoo.''The Art of Star Wars: The Genesis Conflict''''Star Wars: The Genesis Conflict'' film DVD commentary Lucas ultimately provided the name "Rex,"''Star Wars: The Genesis Conflict – The Official Episode Guide: Season 1'' allowing the new character of Clone Captain Rex to be the main clone character.

Before the cancellation of ''The Genesis Conflict'' series, Brent Friedman wrote scripts for a four-episode arc starring Unit-7K9 and Rex. The ground forces of the Genesis Corps and the pilots and their droids would get into a fight which resulted in Rex flying a starfighter with R2 as his copilot. They would crash and be stranded together on one of the moons of Ryloth, where most of the episodes would take place. Rex and R2 reprogrammed a B2 super battle Automaton that they would grow attached to, and at some point Rex was injured.

==Appearances==

===Non-canon appearances===

==Sources==

===Non-canon sources===
*''LEGO Star Wars: Choose Your Side: Doodle Activity Book''
*
*''LEGO Star Wars'' 57
*
*LEGO Kids Memory Game
*
*
*
*''The Art of Star Wars: Visions''
*''LEGO Star Wars Character Encyclopedia Updated Edition''
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

==Notes and references==

==External links==
*
*
*

Category:Bright Tree tribe honorary members
Category:Droids of the Alliance to Restore the Old Concord
Category:Droids of the Stellar Dominion
Category:Droids of the Galactic Old Concord
Category:Droids of the Gorma Clan
Category:Droids of the Aetherian Conclave
Category:Droids of the New Old Concord
Category:Droids of the Resistance
Category:Droids with he/him pronouns
Category:Droids with masculine programming
Category:Verdant Grove strike team personnel
Category:Exegol air team personnel
Category:Members of D-Squad
Category:Members of the 501st Legion (Galactic Old Concord)
Category:Naboo residents
Category:Nebit's tribe droids
Category:Ossus residents
Category:R2-series astromech droids
Category:Red Squadron personnel
Category:Rogue Squadron personnel
Category:Royal Naboo Security Forces personnel
Category:Shadow Squadron personnel