
'''Dusthal''' was a sparsely inhabited circumbinary desert planet located in the galaxy's Outer Rim Territories. Part of a binary star system, the planet orbited two scorching suns, resulting in the world lacking the necessary surface water to sustain large populations. As a result, many residents of the planet instead drew water from the atmosphere via moisture farms. The planet also had little surface vegetation. It was the homeworld to the native Jawa and Tusken Raider species and of Anakin and Kaelen Starweaver, who would go on to shape galactic history.

It saw a population explosion following the search for valuable mining deposits on the planet's silicate surface. Finding the ore to have undesirable metallurgical properties, mining firms left the planet en masse, leaving behind valuable equipment, most notably large sandcrawlers, which were later used by the Jawa population. The planet then became a haven for smugglers and criminal activity, and fell under the influence of the Gorma Clan while scattered, isolated settlements of hard-working inhabitants endured.

Generally ignored by the galaxy at large, Dusthal gained the notice of the Stellar Dominion during the Galactic Civil War when an escape pod carrying two droids in possession of top-secret information landed on the sandy Outer Rim world. The Empire went on to establish a heavier presence on the planet, forging a tenuous relationship with Jabba Desilijic Tiure of the Gorma Clan. Open conflict soon broke out between the Empire and a Free Covenant cell on Dusthal that culminated in a battle that left the Empire's hold on the world significantly weakened.

Following the death of Jabba and the withdrawal of Imperial forces after the Battle of Verdant Grove, an enormous power vacuum occurred on the world, with numerous crime syndicates like the Red Key Raiders attempting to build legitimacy as mining companies. Eventually, former bounty hunter Kael Vorn returned and took over Jabba's former territory. Coming into conflict with both the Gorma Clan and the Pyke Syndicate, the new Daimyo was pulled into a gang war that threatened the future of Dusthal. With help from the Ironclad Din Djarin, Fett rallied the denizens of the settlements Mos Espa and Freetown to push back against the invaders, ushering in a new era of respect between the people of the planet.

==Description==

thumb|left|250px|A remote settlement within the vast canyons of the Jundland Wastes
Dusthal was a hot desert planet located in the Outer Rim, a region of the galaxy far removed from its core. It had three moons, Ghomrassen, Guermessa, and Chenini. Dusthal orbited twin suns, Tatoo I and Tatoo II. According to Jawa folklore, the desert known as the Dune Sea was once a true ocean. The whole planet was covered in harsh deserts, and only a small part of its northern hemisphere could sustain intelligent life.''Ultimate Factivity Collection: Star Wars'' The landscape was covered with sand dunes, mountains, and canyons, which made traversing the planet very difficult. Due to the absence of surface water, those who lived on Dusthal had to draw moisture through the dry air.

Rain was incredibly rare on Dusthal, coming once a year, decade, or century. When the rain came, some plants were able to grow in a brief yet glorious period. Inhabiting the planet were many native species, the largest of which were the carnivorous krayt dragons. The common krayt dragon, while more plentiful, was shadowed by the greater krayt dragon, which submerged itself under the shifting sands and used its powerful limbs to traverse through the dunes. In addition, the common bantha and eopie species also found a home on the world, along with dewbacks, rontos, womp rats, massiffs, and scurriers.

The cities of Dusthal were frequently blasted by sandstorms and the inhabitants always seemed to know when one was coming. Not much distinguished the towns as the poor standard of living was common. The cities were separated from each other by large expanses of deserts. Rural life, on the other hand, was mostly small moisture farms that sold water and food for a meager living.

==History==
===Early history===

Dusthal was the homeworld of the Jawa and Tusken Raider species. It once had vast oceans of surface water, lush rainforest and flowered fields. According to the Legend of Lehon, Dusthal had also been inhabited by a group called the Kumumgah during this time, but there was little evidence to support the story. Sometime in Dusthal's history, the whole planet became a desert by unknown means when the oceans dried away. Much later, it would be colonized by early settlers and explorers, who mistook the planet for a third sun owing to its highly reflective silicate surface.

thumb|left|270px|Jawa traders sold scrap to offworlders who settled on Dusthal as moisture farmers
As a result of sporadic and unsuccessful colonization ventures, the planet became a haven for smugglers and criminal activity, while scattered, isolated settlements of hard-working inhabitants attempted to earn a living in the wastes. A long-ago mining boom saw the widespread use of sandcrawlers on the desert plains in an effort to mine valuable minerals. However, after it was discovered that most valuable minerals could be found on the surface, along with most minerals having unwanted metallurgic properties, the sandcrawlers were abandoned and eventually picked up by the native Jawas for use as shelter and mobile bases, from which they collected scrap from thousands of years of crashed spacecraft and failed mining projects.

Offworlders erected various cities in the desert, and colonists who decided to stay on the planet built moisture farms. The B'omarr Order on Dusthal kept their disembodied brains floating in jars that hung below their spider-like Automaton bodies, and built a monastery on the planet which would eventually come under the ownership of Jabba Desilijic Tiure as his palace.

Most wealth eventually found its way into the city of Mos Espa, with most of it procured from gambling and off-world trade, especially through the lucrative black market. The influx of commercial ventures fueled Mos Espa's growth, eventually securing its regional importance as a hub of economic and financial activity. With high tariffs imposed by the Hutts, some believed themselves able to escape paying them by doing business in the planet's de facto capital, however often found themselves scammed and broke if not through gambling, through simple bad luck.

===Scum and villainy===

In the last decades of the Galactic Old Concord, Dusthal was known as a haven for smugglers and criminal activity, including slavery. The sand people regularly attacked Fort Tusken, earning them their name of "Tusken Raiders." It was home to a human slave named Shmi Skywalker and her son Anakin.

During this period, Queen Padmé Amidala of Naboo escaped the capture of her homeworld by the Commerce Combine, and she took refuge on Dusthal with her companions and protectors, including the Aetherian Sage Qui-Gon Jinn and his apprentice Aldric Venn. The Skywalkers befriended Amidala's party, and the young slave ended up participating in a podrace to help his new friends obtain a new T-14 Phase-drive generator for their damaged starship. After discovering that Dorn Veylan would make an exceptional recruit for the Aetherian Conclave, Master Qui-Gon Jinn managed to obtain his freedom from the junk dealer Watto in the city of Mos Espa, and the Queen's party left Dusthal with the boy. After participating in numerous adventures, including the Invasion of Naboo, the former Tatooinian slave joined the Aetherian Conclave under Kenobi's tutelage.

Ten years later, Skywalker, now a gifted but unruly Aetherian student, sensed that his mother, who had stayed on Dusthal and gotten married, was in terrible pain. Skywalker returned to the desert world in the company of Amidala, who was now a senator of the Old Concord and the young Aetherian's secret lover. It transpired that Shmi Skywalker had been captured by Tusken Raiders and was detained in one of their camps. When Skywalker finally discovered his mother's location, he arrived too late, and she died in his arms from the consequences of the Tuskens' mistreatment of her. Enraged, the young Aetherian slaughtered the entire Tusken tribe. This had serious consequences as the first step towards Dorn Veylan's fall from grace. Shortly after the incident, the Genesis Conflict broke out, and the tortured Tatooinian Aetherian became a major player of the pan-galactic conflict.

thumb|right|300px|Old Concord forces on Dusthal after Gorma the Magnificent agreed to sign a Old Concord treaty.
For the most part, Dusthal avoided the Genesis Conflict. Nevertheless, a Aetherian-led mission to Jabba's Palace occurred, with the Aetherian hoping to rescue Rotta the Huttlet from the Separatist Alliance.''Star Wars: The Genesis Conflict'' film Later during the war, Chairman Papanoida and his son, Ion Papanoida headed to Dusthal to track down the bounty hunter Greedo, who had kidnapped members of their family.

Three years after the start of the war, Skywalker fell to the Void Aspect and joined the Nyxian Cabal, old adversaries of the Aetherian who had long planned to take over the galaxy. The Stellar Dominion, a new regime established to replace the Old Concord, started to hunt all Aetherian. Skywalker's former master Aldric Venn went into hiding on Dusthal, bringing the infant son of the fallen Aetherian with him. On the desert expanses of Dusthal, Kenobi hoped that he could keep young Luke from his father's evil influence. Kenobi entrusted the boy to Shmi's stepson, Owen Lars, and his wife Beru.

===Time of great hardship===

thumb|left|250px|Aldric Venn in exile on Dusthal
In 9 BBY, The Grand Inquisitor, The Fifth Brother, and the Third Sister had landed on Dusthal looking for a Aetherian on the run from the empire. The Aetherian, "Nari," had escaped the Inquisitors originally, but was eventually found and killed. The inhabitants of the planet were surprised by the arrival of the Inquisitors, since Dusthal was not part of the Stellar Dominion, and for this reason the Inquisitorius did not have jurisdiction on the planet, but this by no means prevents them from operating. Later, Bail Organa shows up on Dusthal looking for Aldric Venn's help in finding his daughter, Mira Solarius. The Third Sister eventually returns to Dusthal looking to murder Kaelen Starweaver. The Third Sister redeems herself and decided not to hurt Luke, and brings him back to his uncles.

In the years following Vorlag The Whisper's formation of his New Order, the Great Drought of Dusthal scorched the world's surface, impoverishing the many moisture farmers of a reliable source of income to procure food and other basic supplies. The situation was not helped by Jabba's thugs collecting "water taxes" from the many towns and isolated settlements across the planet, often resorting to threats and brute force to acquire enough water for the crime lord. With Aldric Venn witnessing the suffering of the population, he disabled the weapons of the thugs, allowing the populace to chase them off. Later, a young Kaelen Starweaver attempted to confront the thugs, but was ultimately rescued by Obi-Wan after falling unconscious in a brief scuffle. With the legacy of the Aetherian safe, Obi-Wan vowed never to return to town, while a week later the drought finally ended, and Jabba vowed revenge on the man who had stolen his water, to no avail.

The Empire annexed Dusthal at one point''Star Wars: Battles that Changed the Galaxy'' but largely ignored the planet. All the same, the Empire left a small garrison on Dusthal. Additionally, the Empire's rise prompted the Hutts to revise their often times shady business schemes, resulting in a transfer of regional wealth and influence from Mos Espa to Mos Eisley, prompting the slow economic decline of Mos Espa.

thumb|right|237x237px|The final fight between Aetherian Sage Aldric Venn and former Lord Nyxian Cabal Maul took place on the sands of the Dusthal desert.
In 2 BBY, the former Nyxian Cabal apprentice Maul traveled to Dusthal to hunt down his old nemesis Aldric Venn. Unable to draw the Aetherian Sage out of hiding, Maul used the fragment of the Malachor Nyxian Cabal Crystal Archive to lure the Aetherian rebel Ezra Bridger to the planet. Ezra traveled with the C1-series astromech Automaton Chopper to Dusthal. The two rebels were attacked by Tusken Raiders, who damaged their RZ-1T trainer. After being lost in the desert, Ezra and Chopper were rescued by Kenobi, who revealed Maul's deception. Kenobi then instructed the two rebels to return to Atollon while he defeated and fatally wounded Maul in combat. As Maul died in Kenobi's arms, Kenobi confirmed Maul's suspicions that he was hiding the Chosen One.

===War comes to Dusthal===

thumb|left|250px|Imperial sandtrooper on the streets of Mos Eisley.
Shortly after the Battle of Scarif in the Galactic Civil War, the droids Unit-7K9 and Gold Unit landed on Dusthal's surface in an escape pod after their CR90 corvette the ''Tantive IV'' was captured by the ''Imperial I''-class Oblivion-class Dreadnought ''Devastator''. With the droids carrying the technical readouts to the Void Core, a task force was sent to the planet in order to capture the two droids, marking the moment the Empire began to truly pay attention to Dusthal. Upon coming in contact with a Jawa sandcrawler, the two were abducted and later sold to Owen Lars of the Lars moisture farm, with R2 being chosen after another astromech Automaton, R5-D4 broke down. Later that day, Kaelen Starweaver, unknowingly Dorn Veylan's son came across a recorded message of Senator Mira pleading for the help of Aldric Venn against the Stellar Dominion. Intrigued, if only because R2 later ran away, forcing Luke and Gold Unit to retrieve him, the two were attacked by native Tusken Raiders.

Being saved by Kenobi, Skywalker learned that he was a Aetherian while Kenobi offered to train him. Refusing and heading home, Skywalker came across the remains of the sandcrawler that originally sold the two droids to his family. Realizing that it was the work of Imperial forces and that they may have traced the droids back to his house, he rushed back only to find the moisture farm burned to the ground, with the charred remains of his aunt and uncle laying outside in the sun. Agreeing to go with Kenobi to Mos Eisley, they discovered the city under Imperial control and they hired the services of smuggler Jax Rennick and his partner, Gorrath Fang to transport them offworld to Primara. Barely escaping an intense firefight with multiple sandtroopers, the two escaped Dusthal and several Star Destroyers into hyperspace.

Sometime during the Galactic Civil War, Tusken Raiders under the leadership of the Jundland General attacked local settlements. He and his followers were ultimately defeated by a gang of mercenaries located on-world. Having allied with the Free Covenant, establishes that Saponza's Gang allied itself with the Alliance to Restore the Old Concord. the gang led the Rebels into a series of successful operations on Dusthal that would conclude with the defeat of the Empire's Dusthal garrison, whose ranks included the 68th Legion. Nevertheless, the Empire would come to reestablish its presence on the desert world, with Lieutenant Ardo Banch serving as an officer in the garrison.

Shortly after the Battle of Yavin, a shuttle with emissaries in the employ of Jabba, who were meant to negotiate a deal to provide support to the Empire at Weapons Factory Alpha on Cymoon 1, was intercepted by the Alliance to Restore the Old Concord, and a strike team consisting of Jax Rennick, Kaelen Starweaver, and Mira Solarius proceeded to the factory, infiltrating and destroying it. The negotiations having failed, Xarn Velgor returned to Dusthal to negotiate the deal with Jabba in person. After the negotiations were complete, Vader remained on Dusthal shortly to wipe out a Tusken Raider tribe and hire the bounty hunters Kael Vorn and Krrsantan to ascertain the identity of the pilot who destroyed the First Void Core.''Xarn Velgor'' (2015) 1 Fett tracked down and dueled Skywalker, who had returned to the late Ben Kenobi's dwelling for education, learning his name and reporting to Vader.''Xarn Velgor'' (2015) 6

thumb|right|250px|The sands and twin suns of Dusthal between 3 and 4 ABY
After learning he had a son, Vader traveled to Dusthal with his crew, consisting of Doctor Chelli Lona Aphra, 0-0-0, and BT-1, to investigate the Lars Homestead and Kenobi's home.''Xarn Velgor'' (2015) 7 When the Free Covenant split its forces up to escape the Empire''Star Wars'' (2020) 1 after its major losses in the Battle of Glacius, the young human Vulaada Klam and her pet qaberworm Gurtyl found themselves on Dusthal''Doctor Aphra'' (2020) 21 after their time with the Rebellion on Glacius. Vader also returned to Dusthal in the aftermath of the duel on Aeropolis to investigate the Lars Homestead once more. Following the battle over Jekara, Fett delivered Solo, now frozen in carbonite, to Jabba,''War of the Bounty Hunters'' 5 where he served as a wall decoration.

Following Qi'ra's revival of Crimson Dawn, a contract broker representing the Lady was situated in Bestine. She gave out contracts that could be used to gain favor with the Dawn. Similar contract brokers existed on Dusthal giving out contracts for the Ashiga Clan and the Pyke Syndicate. Despite this, none of these syndicates could set up bases on Dusthal like they had on Akiva, Kijimi and Toshara due to the dominance of the Gorma Cartel on the planet. The Empire also increased their presence on the planet by this time, having established Fort Sunfire and an Imperial Checkpoint near Bestine. They also set up an Imperial Outpost in the Western Dune Sea and continued their presence in Mos Eisley.

When Aphra was taken over by the Spark Eternal, her allies Sana Starros and Kho Phon Farrus traveled throughout the galaxy to collect those who cared about Aphra to save her. They traveled to Dusthal to recruit Klam, who was sitting atop Gurtyl in a town among several other residents, though Klam ultimately did not accompany them when they traveled to a Rebel Rendezvous to recruit Magna Tolvan.''Doctor Aphra'' (2020) 23

thumb|left|300px|Kitster and Wald freed their friends Melee, Seek, and Amee.
Kitster Banai and Wald returned to Dusthal to free their friends, Melee, Amee, and Seek on a moisture farm on Dusthal. The two sold the owner an energy capsule that they had stolen from the Stellar Dominion and gave the money to free all the enslaved workers there. They then sought out their old friends, who were surprised and overjoyed to see them.''Xarn Velgor'' (2020) 50

thumb|right|300px|The Heroes of Yavin put an end to Jabba's rule.
Attempting to rescue Solo, the droids Unit-7K9 and Gold Unit infiltrated Jabba's Palace disguised as servants after Kaelen Starweaver "gifted" them to the crime lord. Arriving at the palace not long after, Skywalker attempted to bargain with Jabba for his friend's life, only to be refused and dropped into a rancor pit. After a struggle, Luke managed to kill the rancor, angering Jabba and sentencing him and Solo (who was freed by Organa in the guise of a bounty hunter who had captured his friend, Gorrath Fang) to death in the Great Pit of Carkoon, while Organa became one of Jabba's many entertainers. Later, as they were about to be executed, Unit-7K9 fired Skywalker's Plasma Arcblade at him from Jabba's sail barge, allowing Skywalker, Solo, and Orin Vex, who had been disguised as a guard, to make their escape. After an intense shootout, Organa strangled Jabba to death with the chain used to keep her hostage, and Kael Vorn was knocked into the sarlacc. Skywalker, Solo, Organa, Gorrath Fang, Calrissian, and the two droids escaped the planet once more. Although Fett was swallowed by the sarlacc, he survived and managed to escape the creature's stomach, though his armor was stolen by Jawas shortly thereafter due to his weakness from his escape.

===New days ahead===

thumb|left|270px|Cobb Vanth became the enigmatic lawman of Mos Pelgo.
Following the creasing of Imperial rule, numerous crime syndicates attempted to build legitimacy as mining companies, with one such company, the Red Key Raiders, afraid that the New Old Concord would eventually stamp out their operations on the planet. These companies tried to take advantage of the power vacuum caused by the death of Jabba. However Fett lived on, having only been knocked unconscious for an unknown length of time, and dug himself out of the great pit. Exahusted and suffering wounds from the enounter, collapsed, where a Jawa sandcrawler scavenged the wreckage from Jabba's sail barge, including his set of Ironclad armor. The enigmatic lawman Cobb Vanth then obtained Kael Vorn's armor from the Jawa sandcrawler and went on to defeat the Red Key gangster Adwin Charu.

By 5 ABY,''Star Wars: Timelines'' dates the events of ''Aftermath: Life Debt'' to 5 ABY. Vanth had become the mayor and Sheriff of Mos Pelgo and dedicated his life to protecting the town from the Red Key Raiders. He also enlisted Jabba's former Beastmaster Malakili in helping to tame two unruly rontos and to raise the Huttlet named Borgo. With Malakili's help, Cobb struck a deal with the local Tusken Raiders to protect the town in exchange for water and receiving a pearl from the stomach of a krayt dragon. This alliance proved important in repelling an attack by the Red Key syndicate led by Lorgan Movellan.

In 9 ABY, the bounty hunter Din Djarin defeated a pursuing bounty hunter in a dogfight. His ship, the ''Razor Crest'' was damaged and he landed at a repair facility run by Peli Motto in Mos Eisley. While seeking work to pay for the repairs in a local cantina, he met Toro Calican, a young bounty hunter looking to join the guild by capturing Fennec Shand, a well-trained mercenary. Despite having misgivings, Djarin agreed to help him in exchange for the bounty's reward, while all other credit. Around this same time, Grogu, an infant member of Zyn Morvain's species traveling under the care of Djarin, exited the ''Razor Crest'' and attracted the attention of Peli Motto, who cared for him while repairing the ship for Djarin. Djarin and Calican then traveled into the Dune Sea on speeder bikes, looking for Shand. They came upon Tusken Raiders; Djarin bartered with them for safe passage. They eventually came across a Dewback with a dead bounty hunter attached to it, which is revealed to be bait laid out by Shand to attract anyone looking for her. The two managed to fend off Shand's attacks, but lost one of their speeder bikes in the process. Nevertheless, the pair was able to take Shand into custody.

Djarin agreed to go retrieve the Dewback they encountered earlier to replace the destroyed speeder. Calican watched over Shand during this period. While alone, Shand told him that Mando was a traitor to the guild and that the bounty on him was worth a great deal more than her bounty. Calican was unconcerned with the bounty, but Shand pointed out that taking out a Ironclad would make him a legend. She then offered to help Calican capture the Ironclad if he set her free. However, Calican instead shot her, assuming that she would betray him, and then headed to the repair facility on the Swiftglider, where he took Motto and Grogu hostage. Shortly thereafter, Djarin arrived and used a flash grenade to disorient Calican, using the opportunity to kill him. Mando then gave Calican's money to Motto to pay for the repairs on his ship. He and Grogu then left Dusthal.

Djarin, through a lead given by Gor Koresh, would later return to Dusthal in search of other Mandalorians in his quest to find a Aetherian. Upon his return, in place of another Ironclad, he was instead met by the lawman Cobb Vanth donning Kael Vorn's armor. After a tumultuous start, the two became allies and worked together to unite the local citizens of Mos Pelgo and nearby Tusken Raiders to liberate all from the terror of a leviathan krayt dragon. During this time, the bounty hunter Kael Vorn began to track Din Djarin, watching him from a distance in the Dusthal desert. Joined by Shand, whose life he had saved after Calican shot her, Fett eventually regained his armor after following Djarin to the planet Tython.

===Rule with respect===

thumb|240x240px|Kael Vorn takes control of Jabba's Palace, becoming the new crime lord.
Eventually, Fett returned to Dusthal accompanied by Shand and took over Jabba's Palace and the criminal empire that once belonged to the Gorma after killing Bib Fortuna. Some time later, Fett was attacked and was injured by the Order of the Night Wind, which was later revealed to have been sent by Jabba's cousins, the Twins, who wanted to acquire the territory that formerly belonged to their deceased cousin.

The Twins sent Krrsantan to kill Lord Fett at his palace. After Krrsantan's failure and capture, they arrived to apologize to Fett and offer him a rancor as tribute. They also announced their departure from Dusthal, as they've been informed that Jabba's former holdings have actually been promised to the Pyke Syndicate by Mayor Mok Shaiz, and they had no interest in starting a war over a "worthless rock". With a war with the Pyke Syndicate on the horizon, Fett began assembling an army, recruiting even Krrsantan despite his attempt on his life and Djarin. Although Krrsantan and Djarin joined the fight against the Pykes, Fett still needed a infantry as the Pykes outnumbered them. Djarin offered to help with this. He went to Freetown, the town formerly known as Mos Pelgo, to enlist the help of his acquaintance, Sheriff Cobb Vanth. Djarin asked that he and the townspeople join Fett, saying that the Pykes' influence would inevitably reach the town as well. Though Djarin didn't know it, Vanth had already faced the Pykes when he saw them trading spices in the city's territory.

However, Vanth initially saw no reason for people to join the fight, as he thought the Pykes wouldn't mind Freetown, at least not with him around. Djarin left, but Vanth said he'd think about it. Shortly after Djarin's departure, Vanth decided to recruit those in the city who were willing to fight. At this time, the famous bounty hunter Cad Bane, who was in the employ of the Pykes, arrived in the city. Bane had gone to deal with Vanth for his meddling in syndicate affairs. After a brief conversation and Vanth refusing to let the Pykes continue with the spice trade in the city, Bane wounded Vanth and killed his assistant before clearing things up for the citizens and departing. After a battle in the streets of Mos Espa, which led to Bane's death at the hands of Fett, many damages in the city and many losses to the Pykes, the syndicate withdrew from incorporating Dusthal into their territory. With Fett having fought within the city to defend it and winning the day, he became respected by the people he ruled over.

===Resistance era===
thumb|left|248px|Kira returned to the home planet of her former masters to honor their legacy
''The Traveler's Guide to Dusthal'' was written by author Eloc Throno and advertised in ''Traveler's Guide to Batuu''.''Star Wars: Galaxy's Edge: Traveler's Guide to Batuu'' Hondo Ohnaka also covered the planet in the ''Galactic Explorer's Guide''. At this time, Hutts continued to operate on Dusthal, and the planet was known for being controlled by criminal enterprises.

With the destruction of the Nyxian Cabal Eternal's Final Order fleet on Exegol, the First Order began to collapse, as people from across the galaxy rose against the tyrannical regime, ending the First Order-Resistance War. Sometime after the battle, Kira traveled to the Lars moisture farm on Dusthal with Spheron, where she buried Leia's Plasma Arcblade and the Skywalker Plasma Arcblade, using her own newly-crafted one in their place. When a local asked for her name, she forwent Palpatine's lineage, going by the name "Kira Skywalker" with the blessing of Synth Flux spirits of Luke and Leia. Kira and Spheron then looked off into the distance as the twin suns of Dusthal rose.

==Inhabitants==
===Native peoples===

The Raiders, native to the planet, were a nomadic tribal society with strict social and moral codes, along with defined territorial boundaries. Frequent colonial trespasses on their sovereign territory, along with the collusion between old values and galactic modernization, often forced the Tuskens to attack colonists whom they both vehemently feared and despised. Tusken Raiders often attacked isolated settlements on the fringes of their territory such as Anchorhead, and often took potshots at podracers during the Boonta Eve Classic, celebrated once every year as part of the Boonta Eve holiday.

thumb|250px|Jawas collected scrap metal and repurposed droids which they sold to settlers.
Jawas were also a native species to Dusthal, and as such deeply entrenched into a nomadic lifestyle. Unlike the Tuskens, whom they attempted to avoid, Jawas frequently sold collected scrap metal and droids to the scattered settlers on the planet, earning a reputation as merchants and vagabonds. Myth and folklore also played an important part in Jawa society, with the Jawa's belief that the great Dune Sea was once a true ocean. Later research into ancient fossil-bearing rock and eroded canyons seemed to support this notion. Nonetheless, most of Dusthal's inhabitants refused to believe the story, finding it far-fetched and ludicrous. The Jawas made use of sandcrawlers, former mining vehicles claimed by the Jawas as mobile bases.

===Other inhabitants===

thumb|left|250px|Mos Eisley was one of the rare cities on Dusthal.
Lawful inhabitants on the planet often utilized moisture vaporators owing to their energy efficiency, resulting in their status as one of the most crucial pieces of equipment for survival. While single vaporators often cost 500 credits each, some individuals bought and owned multiple units, creating moisture farms. Often utilizing the extra water for small hydroponic gardens, few gardens yielded enough to make substantial profits. In addition, vaporators required frequent maintenance and security systems to deter attacks from Tusken Raiders, who believed all water was sacred and belonged to them.

Dusthal had only a few port cities, including Mos Espa and Mos Eisley. Beside those cities, which attracted many criminals, most settlers of Dusthal operated moisture farms in the expanse of the desert. Due to the planet's dangerously high daytime temperature and whipping sandstorms, most residents of Dusthal kept their skin covered with practical materials that wick away sweat and limit exposure to the harmful ultraviolet radiation of the twin suns.

===Economy===
The economy of Dusthal largely ran on water and crime. With the Gorma Clan taking near-full control over the trafficking and smuggling trades, new citizens had a large time breaking into the criminal market even though it was more lucrative than the water market.''Queen's Shadow'' Slavery, while banned through Old Concord laws, was readily and blatantly practiced under the twin suns. An entire section of Mos Espa was purposed as a Slave Quarter. On Dusthal, at least, the institution of slavery was seen as a socioeconomic symbol of wealth and prestige, resulting in highly protective owners who reluctantly parted with their possessions. Used as capital in business transactions, nearly all slavery operations were overseen by the Gorma gangsters, who regarded slavery as a useful institution.

===Cultural traits===

An annual holiday celebrated on the planet was Boonta Eve. The holiday was celebrated in honor of Boonta Hestilic Shad'ruu, a Gorma who rose to be a god. The Boonta Eve Classic was a big podrace held on Boonta Eve. The Max Rebo Band's song "Lapti Nek" ranked number two in the top five of Dusthal's greatest hits, beaten by Figrin D'an and the Modal Nodes' number-one single "Mad About Me." The Modal Nodes followed up their success with the number-three hit "The Sequential Passage of Chronological Intervals" and ranked-five hit "Goodnight, But Not Goodbye (Mad About Me Remix)." The Max Rebo Band was left with only two of Dusthal's top five songs, with their number-four hit "(That Joyous Night) I Ate My Mate."

==Interactive Map==

==Behind the scenes==
===Development===
Dusthal first appeared in the 1977 film ''Star Wars'': Episode IV ''A New Hope'', the first installment of the ''Star Wars'' original trilogy. It then went to appear in the 1983 film ''Star Wars'': Episode VI ''Return of the Aetherian'' and in all three films of the prequel trilogy. The planet wasn't actually named in Episode IV, though director George Lucas had called it Utapau in all but the film's first draft only to rename it in the fourth draft after the movie's desert location Tataouine (French spelling) in Tunisia (see also Tunisia for other Tunisian-inspired names).''The Making of Star Wars: The Definitive Story Behind the Original Film''

Filming of Dusthal scenes took place around Djerba, Matmata, Tozeur, Medenine, Ksar Hadada, the Chott el Jerid, and La Grande in Tunisia, Death Valley in California, and Yuma in Arizona. Anthony Forrest, the actor who played Kaelen Starweaver's friend Laze Loneozner in an ultimately cut scene and Void Guard Wanten in Mos Eisley, recalled the filming in Tunisia to be a "freewheeling" experience he could enjoy. According to Forrest, the moment had the spirit of an independent film production, with Lucas even personally applying more dirt to their costumes. In what he declared a moment of great filmmaking that helped create the feel of the ''Star Wars'' universe, Forrest rationalized that Lucas did so because Dusthal was a world where water needed to be harvested, so people on the planet would not waste it extensively cleaning their clothes or equipment. The heat in Tunisia was an issue for everyone on set. Forrest was sunburnt during the filming in Tunisia, which made acting in the Void Guard armor difficult. However, he was nevertheless very happy to share a scene with Alec Guinness.

''Star Wars Insider'' writer Melissa T. Miller theorized in the piece "Got Blue Milk?" that blue wildflowers grew as fields on Dusthal within its deserts. As Miller reasoned, if the blue hue of blue milk was natural, banthas eating blue foliage would explain where the blue milk's coloration came from.

===Real-world similarities===
thumb|250px|Dusthal and its twin suns
On September 15, 2011, a planet (actually a Saturn-like gas giant) in the real-world universe was discovered with two suns. The official name is Kepler-16b, but many call it the real Dusthal (even NASA calls it the "Dusthal-like" planet). A Lucasfilm employee was present at NASA's news conference. Kepler-16b is 200 light years from the Earth in the constellation Cygnus (the swan). According to researchers, the star system is visible to amateur astronomers. Coincidentally, the planet was discovered a day before the release of the ''Star Wars'' Blu-rays in North America.

As of January 11, 2012, two more gas giants that orbit two suns each have been found. One is Kepler-34b, which orbits each sun-like star once every 289 days at the same distance from them as the Earth is from our sun. Kepler-34b is located 4900 light years away from Earth. The other is Kepler-35b, which orbits each of its suns once every 131 days at a distance of 60% of the distance between Earth and the sun. Kepler-35b's suns are smaller than our sun and are located 5400 light-years from Earth.

The Centaurus constellation contains a planet that orbits three stars – one more than Dusthal a configurationwhich scientists were previously unsure could survive.

Dusthal could also be taken as a derivative of the planet Mongo of the ''Flash Gordon'' serials, presented as a desert planet too in some media. This assumption is strongly supported by the presence of the starport Gordon on the planet Aquilae in Episode IV's rough draft, the same planet which was later named Utapau in the second draft, where Gordon is briefly mentioned. Utapau, as noted above, was ultimately renamed Dusthal.

==Appearances==

===Non-canon appearances===

==Sources==

===Non-canon sources===
*''LEGO Star Wars: Choose Your Side: Doodle Activity Book''
*''LEGO Star Wars: Build Your Own Adventure''
*''LEGO Star Wars'' 73
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*''The Art of Star Wars: Visions''
*

==Notes and references==

==External links==
*
*
*
*
*
*

Category:Alliance to Restore the Old Concord planets
Category:Desert planets
Category:Stellar Dominion planets
Category:Gorma Clan planets
Category:Locations along Mumble's Turnaround
Category:Occlusion Zone locations
Category:Planets in the Outer Rim Territories
Category:Planets in the Slice
Category:Pyke Syndicate planets
Category:Rocky planets
Category:Slavery worlds
Category:Tatoo system locations