
The '''Galactic Empire''', also known as the '''First Galactic Empire''', the '''Imperial regime''', '''Palpatine's regime''', or simply the '''Empire''', and later as the '''Old Empire''', was a fascist and imperialist dictatorship that replaced the Galactic Republic at the end of the Clone Wars. Though the Empire rose to power by promising to bring order to the galaxy, it oversaw a period of military rule and aggressive expansion. The subsequent Imperial Era would last only two decades, for it was eventually overthrown by the Alliance to Restore the Republic in the Galactic Civil War, but not before the sovereign star systems of the galaxy's known regions had been largely conquered by the Empire's forces.

The Empire traced its origins to a Sith conspiracy to destroy the Jedi Order and regain control over the galaxy. The Empire was secretly controlled by the Sith, for the Galactic Emperor was, in fact, the Sith Lord Darth Sidious, whose reign was enforced by his apprentice, Darth Vader, whom he eventually elevated to the position of supreme commander of the Imperial fleet. Rising to power on a groundswell of populist support and capitalizing on anti-Jedi and anti-droid sentiment and human-ethnocentrism manufactured by the destructive Clone Wars, Darth Sidious appointed himself Emperor at the end of the conflict by promising security and stability to the war-torn Republic. Gaining the overwhelming approval of the Galactic Senate, Darth Sidious staged a coup by the Jedi and oversaw their subsequent purge from the galaxy, assisted by his right-hand, Darth Vader.

The Empire stood virtually unchallenged during its rise to power, with the backing of the Imperial Senate and the spreading of its massive technological military force across the galaxy and began a major expansion and encroaching into the unexplored regions. At first, the Galactic Empire was a constitutional monarchy in basic theory, however it gradually evolved into a stratocracy as the power of the Imperial Senate waned. However, numerous insurgent cells sprang up against the Empire and gradually united to initiate a growing rebellion, winning its first major victory over Mustafar in 4 BBY. These rebel groups eventually formed the Rebel Alliance in 2 BBY, and achieved its first major victory with the theft of the Death Star plans on Scarif, which, in turn, led to the destruction of the Death Star at the Battle of Yavin. The following years saw initial Alliance successes until a major Imperial victory on Hoth in 3 ABY, but the Empire suffered a devastating defeat one year later at the Battle of Endor. During the battle, Darth Sidious was slain at the hands of his former disciple, the redeemed Anakin Skywalker, who himself died shortly thereafter, marking the end of Sith rule and the deterioration of the Empire and the resumption of the Galactic Republic, the New Republic.

With the deaths of the Emperor and his top lieutenant, factionalism overcame the Empire as it fractured into breakaway fiefdoms led by splinter Moffs, admirals, and generals, many of whom ignored Grand Vizier Mas Amedda's authority at the capital and became warlords as the Empire continued to fight the Republic. The Imperial Navy came to be publicly led by loyalist Grand Admiral Rae Sloane, though she was a figurehead for Fleet Admiral Gallius Rax. Ultimately, Rax seized control over the loyalist forces, removing Sloane from power and becoming Emperor-in-effect through his new position as Counselor to the Empire. Under Rax's command, the Empire made its final stand at the Battle of Jakku in 5 ABY, ultimately losing and capitulating to the New Republic. With the cessation of the fighting, the Galactic Concordance was signed, vanquishing the Empire.

While the Empire was gone, its replacement of the New Republic faced continued resistance from several Imperial holdouts in the years after. Meanwhile the First Order, a military organization dedicated to rebuilding the Empire, began a clandestine armament program. They were unaware, however, that they had been manipulated by a new hidden conspiracy, for secret cultists on the lost world of Exegol attended to the spirit of Darth Sidious, and constructed a fleet built to herald a new Sith Empire. The cult efforts ultimately failed, however, for they were opposed by the Resistance and Jedi Order, leading to an end of the First Order.

==History==
===Early foundations===

The Imperial ideals of the Galactic Empire could be dated back to the Sith Empire of the Old Republic's time period.''Star Wars: Squadrons'' Following the defeat of the Sith during their final war with the Jedi Order, for at least a thousand years, the dominant governing body of the galaxy was the unicameral, parliamentary, and democratic Galactic Republic, which was governed by the Galactic Senate and led by an elected Supreme Chancellor.

thumb|left|250px|Sheev Palpatine was the public persona of Darth Sidious, who conspired to restore Sith rule across the galaxy.
In the last decades of its existence, the Republic Senate became embroiled in bureaucracy, rendering it woefully ineffectual as a governing body. Darth Sidious, the Dark Lord of the Sith known publicly as Senator Sheev Palpatine of Naboo, privately lamented the declining state of the Senate, noting that the Republic was "not what it once was."

Thirteen years before the Republic's end as a democracy, Darth Sidious orchestrated the Invasion of Naboo by the Trade Federation in order to create a leadership crisis in the Senate. Sidious used the crisis to manipulate the then Queen of the Naboo, Padmé Amidala, into calling a Vote of No Confidence against sitting Supreme Chancellor Finis Valorum. The vote passed, and in the subsequent election, Sidious&mdash;in his public persona of Senator Palpatine of Naboo&mdash;secured the position of Supreme Chancellor of the Galactic Republic for himself through a strong sympathy vote. Ultimately, he would be the last individual to hold this office.

In the decade that followed, Sidious secretly manipulated galactic events to the extent that war became inevitable. Besides persuading a dead Jedi Master, Sifo-Dyas, to create a secret clone army, he also tasked his Sith apprentice, Darth Tyranus, with exacerbating political tensions in the Republic and engineering a Separatist Crisis. These actions would culminate in the outbreak of the Clone Wars held on Geonosis, the last conflict of the Republic, while Sidious himself "reluctantly" accepted emergency powers from the Senate. The Clone Wars, Sidious planned, would further make people in the galaxy grow bitter with the Republic''Queen's Hope'' while he centralized his power to sweep away the Republic and Jedi.

===Birth of the New Order===
====Drawn out conflict====

thumb|right|250px|Through the Clone Wars, Sidious strengthened his authority as Supreme Chancellor Palpatine of the Galactic Republic.
Since the onset of the Clone Wars in 22 BBY,''Star Wars: Galactic Atlas'' the Republic endeavored to strengthen its security and stability through the creation of new organizations such as the Commission for the Protection of the Republic (COMPOR), which utilized propaganda to increase public morale, promote patriotism, and foster anti-Separatist sentiment within the general population. As the Republic became increasingly centralized, however, Chancellor Palpatine's powers continued to grow through additional assets ceded to the Office of the Chancellor, including the galactic banking system that was placed under his direct oversight. This gave Sidious the finance he needed to build his empire.  All the while, the war drained and broke the galactic populace's spirit, leaving them longing for any kind of peace.

The Chancellor remained a popular leader for the duration of the war, having managed to stay in office at the will of the Senate for longer than his term permitted. As he consolidated and centralized his own power, his influence expanded to an unprecedented level while the Republic shifted from a democratic government to an increasingly militarized and authoritarian regime on the grounds of security and stability. In addition to his authority as Commander-in-Chief of the Republic Military, the Chancellor exerted more control over the Senate, the courts, and even the media, with HoloNet News becoming a state-run program in order to ensure that information would not be compromised by the Confederacy of Independent Systems. Sidious's hold over the Republic further expanded with additional amendments to the Galactic Constitution while public support for the Jedi weakened as the war carried on, paving the way for his ultimate ascension as Emperor of the galaxy.

====Proclaiming the Empire====

thumb|left|250px|The Jedi, having discovered Palpatine's secret identity, confronted the chancellor in his office on Coruscant.
As the war neared its end in 19 BBY, the Jedi Order had grown skeptical about the Chancellor after his accumulation of emergency power. They began to suspect that a plot to destroy the Jedi was close to fruition. The ruling council started discussing forcibly removing Palpatine from office and temporarily overseeing the Senate in order to maintain political stability during the transition period. However, the Jedi learned of Palpatine's true identity as Dark Lord of the Sith, Darth Sidious. Following an attempt to arrest him, a brief but vicious fight ensued in which Sidious killed several Jedi and was himself injured and visibly disfigured. The intercession of Jedi Knight Anakin Skywalker, who was a personal friend of Chancellor Palpatine and already disillusioned with both the Order and the war, ensured Sidious's victory. The prodigal Jedi was turned to the dark side of the Force, while Sidious had a pretext upon which to turn the Republic against the Jedi.

thumb|right|250px|The purging of the Jedi Order commenced with Order 66, which the clone troopers were programmed to obey.
Darth Sidious immediately purged the Jedi Order, issuing to the clone army Order 66: to exterminate all Jedi. With this command programmed into the clones since their births on Kamino, the clone troopers immediately turned on their Jedi commanders and exterminated the vast majority of the Jedi Order in an instant. Meanwhile, Anakin Skywalker&mdash;rechristened as Sidious's new Sith apprentice Darth Vader&mdash;attacked the Jedi Temple and wiped out what remained of the Order. Palpatine would go onto claim it was the Jedi who had been behind the war and that they were attempting to subvert the Republic from within,''Crimson Reign'' 3 with the Empire's narrative holding the Jedi as being the puppet masters of the Separatist Alliance''Darth Vader'' (2017) 1&mdash;something supported by the public knowledge that Dooku had once been a Jedi&mdash;in a long-plotted coup. With his speech, he pinned recent galactic crises squarely on the Jedi Order. Subsequent Imperial narratives would separate the CIS and Jedi Order, however.''Leia, Princess of Alderaan''''Reign of the Empire: The Mask of Fear''

Despite their Order being wiped out, certain Jedi survived the initial purge. Many of them went into hiding after Grand Master Yoda and Master Obi-Wan Kenobi fought their way into the Temple and transmitted a holographic message warning the other Jedi about the Republic trap waiting for them there, right before the two Masters failed to destroy the Sith and headed into exile themselves. Some of them, however, were initially hunted down and either killed, taken prisoner or turned to the dark side as part of an agency of dark side adepts known as the Inquisitorius.''Star Wars Jedi: Fallen Order'' Over the Imperial Era, the Empire would also come to change the story of the Jedi Order's supposed betrayal to, little by little, erase the Jedi from history. Later Imperial histories would disregard the story of a Jedi coup, instead painting the picture of an Order that had greatly dwindled in number and was mostly forgotten by the Clone Wars.''Alphabet Squadron''

thumb|left|250px|In the aftermath of the Clone Wars, the First Galactic Empire was born with Sidious' ascension as Emperor of the galaxy.
Shortly afterwards, Sidious turned his eyes to the Confederacy of Independent Systems and dispatched Darth Vader to wipe out Nute Gunray and the rest of the Separatist government leaders on Mustafar, following which Imperial financier Arsin Crassus plundered the Trade Federation's accounts to fund the new Imperial government. Now able to demonstrate threats to the Republic from both within and without, a visibly injured and scarred Sidious addressed the Galactic Senate to announce the reforms which had been his plan since the beginning. To the thunderous applause of the Senators, Sidious&mdash;known publicly as Supreme Chancellor Palpatine&mdash;announced that in order to preserve security and continued stability, the Republic would be reorganized into the First Galactic Empire''Battlefront: Twilight Company'' and proclaimed himself as Galactic Emperor. Eager for an end to the war and its suffering, the galaxy accepted the Empire.

===Imperialization===
====Re-ordering the Republic====

thumb|right|250px|The Jedi became vilified as the Old Republic faded into history, supplanted by the New Order of Emperor Palpatine.
Existing government bodies were renamed to reflect the change in authority as civil and military superstructure of the Old Republic were overhauled immediately under the personal direction of the Emperor. With vast portions of the galaxy still unconquered, the Grand Army of the Republic became the Imperial Army,''Rebel Journal by Ezra Bridger'' while the Republic Navy became the Imperial Navy and the Galactic Senate was rechristened the Imperial Senate. The renowned Senate Plaza, with its name reminding residents of the Old Republic, was promptly changed to the Imperial Plaza. Ultimately, the mechanisms created for the Republic during the war were twisted to fit Sidious' use, with even the systems built with help from the Jedi benefiting the new Emperor.''Ahsoka'' All the while, the Emperor and his followers began formulating their century plan for the galaxy and how it would change under Imperial rule.

In addition, the former roundel of the Republic was replaced with the new Imperial crest, adorned on almost everything having to do with Sidious' Empire.''Star Wars Rebels: The Visual Guide'' With every day that passed, Sidious' hold over the galaxy grew tighter. For the next decade and a half, Imperial rule&mdash;bolstered by the military created to fight in the Clone Wars&mdash;dominated the galaxy and was largely unchallenged. The Empire soon began to upgrade its military hardware, replacing V-wing and ARC-170 fighters with newer TIE models five years after the Clone Wars, but Republic-era military equipment continued to be used for a while on distant outposts and locations such as Galidraan Station. The Republic's Phase II clone trooper armor would begin a phase out and be replaced by superior stormtrooper armor, whose development had been headed by the Imperial Department of Military Research. In the meantime, the Empire quietly supported the activity of the 4040s activist group, whose members functioned as something of a paramilitary in due time.

All the while, the average peoples of the Empire carried on, thinking that their lives would continue happily. On the whole, the population was relieved to see an end to the war and the fear it instilled in their lives. While certain anti-Imperial actions could be punished, with word spreading that some traitors were sent to the spice mines of Kessel, the administration&mdash;in that period of early establishment, where its foundations were shaky&mdash;only cracked down on major threats to its existence. That created a sense of false security in the population, whose civil liberties were curtailed over the prolonged existence of the Empire, instead of in one great stroke. Palpatine relied on populist messaging that appealed to the average citizen, but the Empire was, in truth, a state designed for the wealthy,''Star Wars: The Rise and Fall of the Galactic Empire'' who would enjoy comfort and the state's kindness''Star Wars'' (2020) 46 at the expense of those average workers and populations.

Mothma and Organa championed the Imperial Rebirth Act to try and reclaim power for the Senate that had been claimed by Palpatine, only for Palpatine to claim that, as Emperor, he had the ability to veto portions of the bill. While Mothma disagreed with the claim, she was not yet ready to start a war against the Emperor, who had the love of the galaxy's population and the power to back it up, so found herself forced to accept the defeat. Nonetheless, faced with the revelation that senatorial action would not be enough to curtail Palpatine, Mothma and Organa began a covert partnership with the rebel leader Saw Gerrera of the Partisans; in this alliance, Gerrera would stand as the military heart and provide the beginnings of a rebel army, Mothma would build coalitions to oppose Palpatine as their movement's political heart, and Organa would stand as its ideological heart, bringing together thinkers and reformers who could present a new way forward.

====Continuing clean-up====

Happy for the peace and the end to the fighting the rise of the Empire brought after the Clone Wars had killed billions, the new government was welcomed by people all throughout a galaxy that was tired of the bloodshed; on the planet Pantora, citizens cheered as clone stormtroopers marched past them near a Imperial Informational Station, where a message played announcing personal chain codes and new currency.

thumb|left|250px|The battle droids that fought for the Confederacy of Independent Systems were decommissioned and destroyed.
After the Separatist Droid Army was promptly shut down, its navy was dismantled at locations across the galaxy such as the Bilbringi shipyards. However, various droid models and Separatist technology escaped Imperial appropriation and worked their way onto the black market, with many modules taken from Separatist frigates and destroyers, including pieces from Admiral Trench's warship, the ''Invincible''. Despite Separatist-era technology continuing to be used and appearing in locations such as the Corporate Sector, the Empire continued to root out remaining holdouts of the Confederacy four years after the Clone Wars, while criminal organizations composed of repurposed battle droids such as the Droid Gotra operated in Coruscant's underground.

While the Empire at times came into conflict with parts of the criminal underworld,''Doctor Aphra'' (2016) 13 the Empire allied itself with major galactic criminal factions, including Crimson Dawn''Solo: A Star Wars Story'' and the Hutt Clan. The Hutts enjoyed a special relationship with the Empire that remained in place for decades. Other criminal factions, like Papa Toren's group,''Crimson Reign'' 1 the Pyke Syndicate, the Droid Gotra, the Black Sun, the Zerek Besh, all desired to take the Hutt Clan's place as the Empire's formal partner in underworld affairs.''Hidden Empire'' 1

====Hunt for the Jedi====

thumb|right|200px|The remaining Jedi were hunted by the Sith Lord Darth Vader and his Inquisitors.
Any Jedi survivors of Sidious' purge were systematically hunted down and killed either by Darth Vader or any of the Emperor's Inquisitors in the years that followed the rise of the New Order. When Zubain Ankonori and his nest of fellow Jedi were all found within the Jedi shrine on Anoat, they were forced to separate and flee, only to be tracked and killed by an Inquisitor one by one.''Star Wars: Uprising''

In order to draw out any of these Jedi and the children capable of touching the Force, the Empire charged the Inquisitorius with not only tracking the Order 66 survivors down, but also preventing the Force-sensitive youth of the galaxy from becoming Jedi. The Empire also offered rewards for those who turned over surviving Jedi to Imperial authorities, dead or alive.

====Minor resistance====

thumb|left|300px|Imperial rule fostered resentment on occupied worlds, including the Twi'lek homeworld of Ryloth.
As pirates, smugglers, and ex-Separatists were routinely imprisoned and destroyed, the Empire faced little serious resistance to its rule. A rare exception revolved around the Outer Rim world of Ryloth, where Moff Delian Mors and Colonel Belkor Dray were fighting an insurgency known as the Free Ryloth Movement, led by former Twi'lek Resistance leader Cham Syndulla, who established hidden bases across Ryloth and executed raids against the Empire, including those on its lucrative spice and slave trade in the sector. Composed of freedom fighters who fought with the Galactic Republic and Jedi Master Mace Windu during the Clone Wars to free their homeworld from Separatist occupation by Emir Wat Tambor, the newly formed Free Ryloth movement would continue its struggle for independence against the Galactic Empire for decades.''Lords of the Sith''

Seeking to make examples of worlds who continued to harbor secessionist tendencies, Moff Wilhuff Tarkin was assigned to make an example of Antar 4, a populous moon that had been a part of the Separatist Alliance and involved in a scheme involving Republic Intelligence to train locals into well-armed resistance groups. While COMPNOR initially stifled information regarding the killings, word soon leaked about the operation through inquisitive reporters such as Anora Fair and Hask Taff, while the event was soon penned as the Antar Atrocity, capturing the attention of many Coruscanti and other citizens from the Core Worlds.

===Age of the Empire===
====Continued expansion====

thumb|right|300px|The Imperial occupation of Aldhani began in 18 BBY and resulted in the planet becoming a waypoint for Imperial materiel.
At some point during its reign, the Empire undertook an expansion effort known simply as the Imperial expansion. It was during this time that they constructed a military installation on the volcanic world of Nevarro. In 18 BBY,As noted here, the events ''Andor'' Season One&mdash;and therefore the events of the episodes "Aldhani," "The Axe Forgets, and "The Eye"&mdash;take place in 5 BBY. In "Aldhani," Vel Sartha states that the Galactic Empire arrived on Aldhani thirteen years prior, therefore dating its arrival to 18 BBY. In "The Eye," Jayhold Beehaz notes the Imperial-approved viewing festival was established a decade prior, placing the beginning of that event in 15 BBY. the Empire arrived on the planet Aldhani due to its tactically useful place in space, liberating the Alkenzi Air Base and creating a dam over the sacred Nasma Klain river that served as a waypoint for weaponry and other supplies, including the quarterly payroll for the overall sector. Beginning an occupation, the Empire displaced the local population of Dhanis over the course of the next ten years. Forcing the Dhani to the southern Lowlands, the Empire established an Enterprise Zone of new Imperial housing and offered work in factories. To discourage Dhanis from traveling to the sacred Valley of Caves, the location of the Aldhani dam, to view the revered celestial event known as the "Eye of Aldhani" that happened every 3 years, the Galactic Empire established an Imperial viewing festival in the Enterprise zone in 15 BBY.

thumb|left|300px|Imperial forces arrive on the planet Ferrix as a show of force.
In 19 BBY,''Star Wars: Dawn of Rebellion: The Visual Guide'' Imperial forces arrived on the planet Ferrix in the Free Trade sector to bring it under the Empire's control. On Rix Road, a regiment  of clone troopers under an Imperial officer marched pass the gathered masses of civilians as a show of Imperial authority, although local citizen Clem Andor assured his adoptive son Cassian Jeron Andor that the Empire would pull out soon enough. To Clem, resisting the Empire was not their fight. However, a small group of protesters emerged from the crowd and began to throw rocks at the soldiers in the name of the Republic and Ferrix in what became known as the Rix Road protest.  Believing they would only make things worse for themselves, Clem quickly stepped in to stop the protest, only for the officer to call his troopers to a halt at that moment. Pointing their blasters at the protesters and Clem, who was assumed to be part of the demonstration, the protest was shut down. Clem was publicly hung on Rix Road for his supposed treason.

Afterward, Cassian attacked four clone troopers stationed near the gallows in anger. At some point, Andor spent time with anti-Imperial anarchist groups. Ultimately, Cassian would be arrested on charges of attacking an Imperial soldier, insurrection, and destroying Imperial property. After spending time in prison, the sixteen year old Andor was sent to the planet Mimban, which had been an ally to the Republic during the Clone Wars but possessed vital resources,''Solo: A Star Wars Story The Official Guide'' as a cook for the Imperial Army. After six months on Mimban, Andor escaped by deserting the military. He later claimed he had seen active combat. Upon escaping, Andor realized the Empire had set him and his other conscripts against people who should have been their allies. Although Andor's resolve to fight the Empire was damaged, the people of Mimban, the Mimbanese, resisted the Empire's encroachment on their world as the Imperial Era carried on. Andor ultimately returned home to Ferrix, which largely remained out of direct Imperial control and instead was governed by the Preox-Morlana corporate polity on behalf of the central Imperial regime. Despite his hate for the Empire, Andor's spirit was crushed, and he attempted to eke out a life for himself, his mother Maarva, and their droid B2EMO.

====Designing the ultimate weapon====

thumb|right|250px|The Emperor performed an inspection of Krennic's work on the Death Star
Having inherited the Republic Special Weapons Group, a top secret group headed by Professor Sahali tasked with top secret project and ordered by Palpatine to construct the deadly battle station from it's predecessor state, the Galactic Empire reformed the Weapons Group into the Imperial Military Department of Advanced Weapons Research in which the Ultimate Weapon project was assigned and split into several smaller projects, with Project Celestial Power, a subproject tasked with the development of a superweapon for the battle station, being publicly presented as an initiative to fulfill Emperor Palpatine's dream of sustainable energy independence to transform the Imperial economy and solidify Imperial authority. Lieutenant Commander Orson Callan Krennic, an Imperial officer who had been involved with the failed attempt at the Battle Station's construction, and had held an administrative post at the Institute of Applied Science on Coruscant screening scientists for expertise on energy manipulation, materials science, and theoretical physics, was placed in charge of the program. Around this time the the outer rings were completed, with the Emperor performing an inspection shortly after, during which Krennic had the focusing array for what would eventually be the laser dish installed.

Barnes & Noble Exclusive Edition insert|thumb|left|250px|Galen Erso was tricked unknowingly into helping to develop the Death Star's superlaser
In charge of the program, Krennic had the B'ankora relocated from the B'ankor Refuge on Coruscant to allow the construction of a new research complex at the site, and seeing potential for the battle station's weapon in the crystallographer Galen Walton Erso Kyber crystal research, offered the crystallographer a spot in the project, convincing him that the project was tasked with bringing sustainable energy to worlds ravaged by the clone wars, which Galen accepted. As Galen made progress on his research on Kyber crystals, Krennic began attempting to weaponize Galen's research at secret facilities on worlds such as Hypori and Malpaz, all while Galen and his family grew suspicious of Galen's work.

Despite Project Celestial Power being hit with a major accident when a facility on Malpaz exploded during a weaponization attempt and destroying the planet's capital city, Krennic eventually succeeded in weaponizing Galen's research with the successful test of prototype duel-laser weapon into a set of Black holes known as the Hero Twins. Yet despite the successful test, the project was once again set back when the team tasked with designing the full superlaser questioned their work and realized who's research was being used, forcing Krennic to "relocate" them. Not long after, Galen discovered the Imperial coverup and massacre, which all but confirmed something was wrong. With this information, Galen decided to run away with his family to Lah'mu, making Project Celestial Power stall until Krennic could locate the crystallographer. Grand Moff Tarkin used the opportunity to give himself an overseeing position of the Ultimate Weapon Project, often stealing credit for Krennic's work and causing a bitter rivalry between him and Krennic.

====Spread of the Empire====

thumb|right|250px|"Glory of the Empire" was played during the yearly [[Empire Day celebrations across Imperial space.]]
As the Galactic Empire grew, Sidious moved closer to his ultimate plan of ruling the entire galaxy and unlocking the secrets of the Sith Masters who had come before him. With the near extermination of the Jedi Order and the Empire swelling in size and strength, the Emperor ultimately planned to possess the powers of the dark side to reshape reality itself into something of his own creation, and an omnipotent Empire would allow all the galaxy's inhabitants to be held in his dark embrace. As Emperor, however, he largely disappeared from public life, leaving his public addresses to become more and more rare.

While, in public, the Imperial system of sector governance was designed to improve and uplift life across the whole of the galaxy, the truth of the Empire and its New Order was that it enforced a form of supposed "natural hierarchy," which uplifted life in the Core Worlds at the expense of those who lived further out across the stars. Planets at the edge of the galaxy suffered under Imperial rule while their resources and wealth were extracted and shipped towards the Core, particularly Coruscant, which prospered under Imperial rule. Imperial leadership and their wealthy contemporaries enjoyed luxurious lifestyles.

As most planets were ecologically devastated over the Imperial Era, rampant industrialization and mass-production eroded local culture and ecological health. People saw their children drafted into Imperial service, while corrupt governors''The Weapon of a Jedi: A Luke Skywalker Adventure'' and magistrates often exploited local populations on worlds such as Jelucan, Devaron and Tangenine. In 18 BBY,''Star Wars: The Rise and Fall of the Galactic Empire'' the Empire conquered and occupied the planet Yar Togna, leading to much of its population fleeing as refugees in a mass exodus. At some point, the Mid Rim uprisings were launched by monarchies that refused to obey Palpatine's will. The revolts ended up as a series of chaotic conflicts that ended in Imperial victory: through the actions of Imperial Starfighter Pilots, the monarchies were forced to submit to the Emperor.

thumb|left|250px|Imperial agents and soldiers were tasked with enforcing the Emperor's reign throughout the galaxy.
Only a year after its founding, the Empire had already begun to enforce itself in the Outer Rim. Worlds that did not fall to the Empire's quick expansion, which installed an oppressive Imperial presence instead of simple bases, became homes to crime lords. In its effort to establish itself in the Outer Rim, in addition to using fear, the Empire withheld food to make populations endure hunger. While the Empire turned a blind eye to various abuses, it still maintained a policy of zero corruption and maintained its high standards of conduct, resulting in numerous Imperial Security Bureau (ISB) officials actively hunting down corrupt and negligent officials, even resulting in investigations by Lord Vader himself. Despite this, many citizens were content with the geopolitical situation in the galaxy, believing that strict measures were necessary to maintain order and stability after the destructive Clone Wars. Many also believed that the Empire, while not the best, was better than anarchy and chaos.''Lost Stars''

thumb|right|250px|Ahsoka Tano inspired the people of Raada to fight for freedom from the Empire.
Despite its seemingly endless expansion, such as on Raada, where Imperial forces arrived to harvest food, which destroyed the quality of the moon's soil and led to a growing oppression. This angered the people of Raada to the point where they staged an uprising after weeks of planning, with the help of ex-Padawan Ahsoka Tano and the forces of Imperial Senator Bail Organa in secret. A major turning point against the Empire's advance into the Outer Rim occurred in 11 BBY, with Imperial forces commanded by Captain Rae Sloane engaging in a small skirmish in the vital Inner Rim system of Gorse.''A New Dawn''

This event saw the meeting of later rebel Hera Syndulla and Jedi survivor Kanan Jarrus, who were confronting efficiency expert Count Denetrius Vidian and his aggressive methods of extracting thorilide&mdash;a vital component in the construction of turbolaser batteries and thus essential for the expansion of the Imperial fleet. The Gorse Conflict ultimately ended with the transferring of local thorilide mining operations to Imperial-aligned Baron Lero Danthe, while Syndulla and Jarrus departed on the heavily modified VCX-100 light freighter ''Ghost'', and would become essential to the eventual formation of the Rebel Alliance.

Meanwhile, more and more worlds within the Empire began to realize its true intentions: After various massacres on Kashyyyk and increasingly brutal tactics, such as the Empire committing genocide on the Lasat homeworld of Lasan, a growing number of citizens of the galaxy began to rebel against Imperial dominion. At least nine years after the proclamation of the New Order, the Corellian Resistance fought the Empire from its headquarters on the planet Corellia. The Empire would also end the independence of many galactic, sector and planetary governments in its early conquests.''Star Wars Rebels: Heroes of Mandalore''

====Theft of the ''Carrion Spike''====

thumb|left|250px|The ''Carrion Spike'' was the personal stealth corvette of Grand Moff Wilhuff Tarkin.
In 14 BBY,''Star Wars: Timelines'' dates the events of ''Tarkin'' to 14 BBY. after Palpatine had spent months on end out of the public eye, members of the Ruling Council, including Mas Amedda and Ars Dangor, arranged for skylimos to move about Imperial City, creating the illusion of Palpatine moving amongst the populous. Furthermore, the ongoing Imperialization of the galaxy and even Coruscant at that time resulted in, as Admiral Nils Tenant observing, personnel being "here on day, gone the next." Around the time, an enormous statue of the Emperor&mdash;which was regarded by Tenant as more terrifying than beautiful&mdash;was erected in Imperial Plaza, with Tarkin arguing to Tenant that it was supposed to be scary, not majestic.

Meanwhile, various survivors of the Antar Atrocity and other malcontents joined together under the leadership of the former Captain Berch Teller, who organized them into a rebel cell intent on stalling the development of the Emperor's newest weapon under construction at Geonosis. After stealing the ''Carrion Spike'', an advanced starship based on a prototype stealth corvette used during the Battle of Christophsis during the Clone Wars, the rebels wreaked havoc across numerous star systems including Lucazec, Galidraan III and Nouane, all while transmitting holovids of their attacks on Imperial HoloNet frequencies, increasing anti-Imperial propaganda across thousands of Mid and Outer Rim star systems before the Empire was able to shut down the communications grid.

After lengthy fleet redeployments and the discovery of a mole within the Imperial ranks, Tarkin, aboard the ''Imperial''-class Star Destroyer ''Executrix'', disabled the rebel warship and captured the dissidents after a brief battle and timely arrival of Star Destroyers ''Compliant'' and ''Enforcer''. To reward Tarkin's skill, the Emperor promoted him to the newly created rank of Grand Moff and gave him command of the ''Executrix'' as well as oversight of the Outer Rim Territories, all while the recent attacks on Imperial facilities were made to look like an elaborate plot to root out rebel cells. The Empire had effectively dealt with a potentially disastrous situation, rooted out a traitor and kept details regarding the development of its superweapon at Geonosis a mere rumor.''Darth Vader'' (2015) 1

The Emperor's long-term plan was to allow what he called the "skeleton of the Republic" to remain in place until the Death Star was completed; this included maintaining the Senate to make the systems believe that they still had a part to play in the government. However, upon the superweapon's completion, the Emperor planned to dissolve the Senate and grant its legislative and administrative powers to the military-industrial complex. The Death Star would also provide order to the galaxy, as part of Grand Moff Wilhuff Tarkin's doctrine of terror, by making its inhabitants too afraid to defy an Imperial command and stand against the Empire.

====Outer Rim expansion====

thumb|right|250px|Sullust was an example of the Empire's industrial development.
Around fourteen years into Sidious' rule as Emperor, the Empire had continued its expansion into the Outer Rim. Worlds like Jelucan saw occupation and development, leading to rampant pollution and industrialization to support the Imperial war machine. One such world that was developed was Lothal, which joined the Imperial Registration Program seeking protection and economic opportunities whereby local citizens would find work in the local Sienar Fleet Systems facilities. Ostensibly this was to grow the local economy, but was in fact secretly part of a much larger five-year plan involving numerous Outer Rim worlds that was overseen by the Imperial Outer Rim High Command, a subdivision of Imperial High Command which was in charge of the Outer Rim Territories.

But the Empire did not fully control the Outer Rim and often utilized its worlds instead as testing grounds for new biological weapons and as a source of cheap labor. Lothal's industrial importance soon came to the fore for the Empire as the Emperor planned to further expand Imperial dominion over the Outer Rim Territories and beyond. In order to maximize the worth of newly occupied systems, worlds such as Lothal soon bore witness to Imperial authorities relocating farmers away from their farmlands to mine for Imperial purposes, leading to the development of re-settlement camps such as Tangletown and Lothal re-settlement camp 43, known by the residents as "Tarkintown" after the Governor of the Outer Rim. The Empire also limited the HoloNet across the Outer Rim, leading many dissatisfied systems to view the embargo as a part of the conquest of the Outer Systems. This aggressive dislocation of persons and high tax rate eventually led to the development of a small and localized, albeit serious upheaval against the Galactic Empire on Lothal.''Star Wars Rebels: The Siege of Lothal''

====Project Stardust resumes====
=====Capturing Galen Erso=====

thumb|left|300px|Krennic and his guard travelled to the Erso homestead on Lah'mu to capture Galen
After landing a a lofty appointment in Imperial Intelligence, Director Krennic tracked down Galen Erso to the remote planet Lah'mu in 13 BBY and personally travelled to the planet''Star Wars: Rogue One: The Ultimate Visual Guide'' to recapture the crystallographer for Project Celestial Power. Arriving at the planet, Krennic's ''Delta''-class T-3c shuttle ST-149 flew over the Erso homestead, alerting the Ersos to the Imperial's arrival, before landing in a field near the homestead. Upon landing, Krennic and six members of his guard of death troopers disembarked the shuttle and began traveling towards the homestead, while Galen, in an attempt to buy time for his wife Lyra and his daughter Jyn to escape, left the homestead and began to travel towards Krennic.

thumb|right|300px|Krennic confronted his old friend Galen on a field outside the latter's homestead
Eventually, Krennic and Galen met each other in a field, where Krennic proceeded to tell Galen that he was hard to find before mocking Galen's choice of farming given his skill. In response, Galen stated that it was a peaceful life, prompting Krennic to point out how lonely it must be, allowing Galen the opportunity to lie that Lyra had died. Upon hearing of Lyra's supposed death, Krennic approached Galen and give his condolences, before then turning and ordering the death troopers of his guard to search Galen's homestead. As a result, four of the death troopers marched onwards to the house, where they carried out the order before setting the homestead on fire while two troopers remained to guard the director. Galen then asked Krennic why he was there, to which he responded that the work had stalled, and as such he needed him to return to the project, to which Galen stated he would not do so. In response, Krennic stated that they were on the verge of greatness and close providing peace and security to the galaxy, to which Galen told Krennic that he was confusing peace with terror. Krennic responded that they had to start somewhere, before Galen then stated that he'd be of no help, claiming that his mind was not what it once was and that he had trouble remembering even simple things. However, Krennic called Galen's bluff, telling him that while he was an inspired scientist, he was a terrible liar, though he personally still admired the effort.

thumb|left|300px|Krennic's death trooper guard held a standoff with Lyra
However, as he continued speaking, Lyra arrived to the confrontation, causing Krennic sarcastically mock Galen's lie about her death as the two death troopers guarding him approached Lyra. Galen then began to walk towards Lyra, causing one death trooper to point their blaster at Galen, before Krennic then called out to everyone to stop. However, Lyra then revealed her blaster from a blanket she was carrying and aimed it at Krennic, causing Krennic to state that she was being troublesome as ever. In response, Lyra told Krennic that he would not be taking Galen, to which Krennic that of course he would not, as he planned on taking everybody in the family including Jyn, and they would all live in comfort. Following Krennic statement, Lyra added that they would be living as hostages, before Krennic the claimed they would instead be living as heroes of the Empire. Following this, Galen told Lyra to drop her weapon while Krennic told her to think very carefully though after a moment of consideration Lyra simply stated to Krennic that he would never win. As a result, Krennic quickly gave the death troopers the order to shoot and kill Lyra, which they quickly carried out, though not before she managed to land a shot on Krennic's left shoulder, causing the commander to grab his arm in pain.

thumb|right|300px|Krennic’s death troopers attempted to locate Galen’s daughter Jyn, but were ultimately unsuccessful
As Galen rushed over to his dying wife, Krennic, still covering his wound, ordered his death trooper squad to find Jyn. In the ensuing search, one death trooper found and picked up Jyn's doll "Stormie" onutside the homestead, but failed to locate Jyn upon scanning the surrounding area. Soon after, two death troopers entered a nearby cave, which unbeknownst to them, was the location of the bunker Jyn was hiding in. As Jyn looked on through a small opening in the bunker's hidden entrance, the two death troopers briefly scanned the cave with the flashlights on their blasters, but ultimately left after failing to locate Jyn in the cave. Despite their failure to locate Jyn, Galen was brought aboard a Star Destroyer and returned to Imperial custody.''Rebel Rising''

=====Progression=====

thumb|left|300px|Pressed into Imperial service under the Tarkin Initiative, Galen Erso returned to his kyber crystal research under Project Celestial Power
Once again in Imperial custody, Galen was forced to return to his kyber crystal research on Project Celestial Power,''Star Wars: The Rebel Files'' now under the secret Imperial think tank known as the Tarkin Initiative. Realizing the DS-1 Orbital Battle Station would be completed no matter if he returned to the project, Galen made himself indispensable to Project Stardust and took over leadership of the Kyber crystal research team on Eadu. Erso's extraordinary intellect managed to revitalize the team's progress,''Rogue One: A Star Wars Story'' novelization allowing the team to complete the design for the Death Star's superlaser after several years under his leadership. Secretly however, Erso planted a flaw in the Death Star's reactor that caused the superweapon to be destroyed when a single shot hit the reactor.

thumb|right|270px|The Empire released a toxic insecticide on Geonosis, massacring the planet's population of around 100 billion Geonosians
As progress began on the Death Star once again, the rebel Partisan Saw Gerrera came close to discovering the battle station, the Empire to move the station and its construction''Star Wars: Rogue One: The Ultimate Visual Guide'' from Geonosis to Scarif''Star Wars: Rogue One: Secret Mission'' on Grand Moff Wilhuff Tarkin's order''Dawn of Rebellion'' around 9 BBY. As a safety measure to keep the battle station's construction a secret, Tarkin further ordered the Imperial Weapons division to sterilize Geonosis, which was promptly carried out with gas canisters of toxic insecticide. The ensuing genocide wiped out all but one of the planet's approximately one hundred billion geonosians, the largest genocide committed by the Galactic Empire during its reign.''Star Wars: Absolutely Everything You Need to Know''

thumb|left|300px|Construction on the Death Star continued in orbit over Scarif
As construction resumed on the battle station in orbit over Scarif, prisoners at an Imperial factory facility part of the Narkina 5 Imperial Prison Complex were assigned to assemble EP-N5 fasteners, which after being brought to Scarif on ''Eta''-class supply barges''Star Wars: Complete Locations, New Edition'' alongside other construction cargo, were used by Imperial construction droids in the assembly of the Death Star's Mk I Superlaser. During this time, Director Krennic was a guest to several senate committees involving Imperial Senator Mon Mothma, where he was forced to testify before the committees while on a witness stand.

====Hunting Kenobi====

=====Trouble on Tatooine=====
thumb|right|300px|Multiple inquisitors travelled to Tatooine in search of the former jedi Nari
In 9 BBY,''Star Wars: Timelines'' dates the events of ''Star Wars: Obi-Wan Kenobi'' to 9 BBY. the Grand Inquisitor, the Fifth Brother, and the Third Sister travelled to Tatooine in search of a Jedi in hiding by the name of Nari, despite the Empire having no authority on the planet. Arriving in the city Anchorhead, the Third Sister interrogated and threatened several townspeople including Owen Lars regarding the Jedi's location, until the Fifth Brother talked her out of it.

Later, the inquisitors visited a Saloon in Mos Eisley and questioned the owner about the Jedi. During interrogation, the Third Sister threw a knife toward the owner's head, before Nari, sitting at a table across the saloon, stopped the knife in its tracks by using the Force, revealing himself. In response, the Third Sister ignited her lightsaber and the Grand Inquisitor ordered an interrogation. However, Nari then stated the inquisitors were wasting their time, causing the Third Sister to attempt to strike Nari only to be stopped by the Grand Inquisitor by way of the Force, allowing Nari to escape in the heat of the moment. Despite Nari's temporary escape, the inquisitors eventually tracked Nari down to Anchorhead and promptly killed him before hanging the dead Jedi's body from a gate for all to see.

=====Dueling on Daiyu=====
Around the same time, the Third Sister secretly arranged for the kidnapping of the adoptive daughter of Alderaan's senator Bail Prestor Organa, Leia Organa, in an attempt to lure the Jedi Master Obi-Wan Kenobi out of hiding following her discovery of a connection between Bail and Obi-Wan in the Jedi Archives. As expected, Obi-Wan came out of hiding at the personal request of Bail, and traveling to Daiyu, the planet where Bail had tracked the mercenaries two kidnapped Leia to.

thumb|left|300px|The Grand Inquisitor confronted the Third Sister over the abduction of Leia Organa
As Obi-Wan travelled the streets of Daiyu, passing a pair of stormtroopers while he did so, the Third Sister was confronted by the Grand Inquisitor, accompanied by the Fifth Brother and the Fourth Sister. During the confrontation, the Grand Inquisitor took control of the situation and the hunt for Kenobi before berating the third sister for kidnapping the daughter of an Imperial senator, despite the Third Sister's argument that the Inquisitorius had done worse. Additionally, the Grand Inquisitor informed the Third Sister that she would be punished at a later time for stepping out of line. Despite this, the Third Sister once again defied her superiors by placing a bounty on the Obi-Wan's head with the intent to use bounty hunters and mercenaries to draw the Jedi Master out.

Shortly afterward, the Grand Inquisitor had the Fifth Brother shut down the planet's port and request a garrison within an hour, before the Fourth Sister then came to him and showed the bounty on Kenobi's head. Shortly after, two stormtroopers brought Vect Nokru, one of Leia's kidnappers, to the Grand Inquisitor, who then interrogated the kidnapper on the location of Kenobi, as the inquisitor knew that Nokru had placed the bounty. However, Nokru stated he did not know, prompting the Inquisitor to murder the kidnapper with his lightsaber.

thumb|right|300px|The Grand Inquisitor was stabbed by the Third Sister
Not long after, the Third Sister saw an firefight between Kenobi and several bounty hunters, and made her way there from the Daiyu rooftops. Upon reaching ground level, the Third Sister was stopped by the con artist Haja Estree, who, in an effort to stall her, pretended to be a Jedi. However, the Third Sister instead probed Estree's mind, discovering that Leia and Obi-Wan were planning to escape Daiyu at a cargo spaceport, before making her way there. upon arriving at the cargo port, the Third Sister attempted to force Obi-Wan and Leia by boasting about delivering the Jedi Master to Darth Vader. However, she was then interrupted by the Grand Inquisitor, who had had enough of the Third Sister's defiance, and as a result, ordered the Third Sister to step aside. The Third Sister pretended to comply before then stabbing the Grand Inquisitor though his torso, believing herself to have killed the inquisitor. However, as she did so, Kenobi and Leia escaped aboard a cargo shuttle, causing the Third Sister to yell that the Empire would find him.

=====Next in Line=====
Not long after the confrontation, the Third Sister contacted Vader, who was at his fortress on Mustafar, of the Jedi's escape and of the Grand Inquisitor's apparent death. In response, Vader informed the Third Sister that if Kenobi was captured, the position of Grand Inquisitor would be hers, but if she failed, she would not live to regret it. Shortly after, the Third Sister met up with the Fifth Brother and the Fourth Sister, instructing them to send out all remaining Probe droids at their disposal. Despite the Fifth Brother questioning the Third Sister's authority in the belief that he was next in line, the Fifth Brother obliged after the Third Sister explained that she had spoken with Vader and it had been agreed.

=====Mining on Mapuzo=====
thumb|left|300px|Stormtroopers shared a ride on Freck's truck with Obi-Wan and Leia
Having escaped to the planet Mapuzo but unable to find a contact, Obi-Wan and Leia convinced a passing Imperial mining transport driver by the name of Freck to take them to the nearest spaceport under the guise of being farmers from  Tawl, which the Condluran agreed to. During the journey, Freck revealed himself to be a staunch supporter of the Empire, before Freck stopped and offered a ride on his truck to a squad of traveling stormtroopers, who accepted the ride. During the journey, the stormtroopers questioned Obi-Wan and Leia over the occuptation and reason for being there, to which the pair lied to about being farmers visiting the homeworld of Leia's mother. Seemingly convinced, the troopers told the pair to report anything suspicious if they saw anything, before then disembarking after arriving near an Imperial facility, which the troops then walked to.

thumb|right|300px|Freck reported his suspicious passengers to Imperial troops at a checkpoint
Not long after, Freck stoped his vehicle at an Imperial checkpoint, and suspicious of the pair, reported the pair to the troopers stationed at the checkpoint. As a result, a stormtrooper ordered Obi-Wan out of the vehicle, which he complied with, before then using a viper probe droid to scan Obi-Wan's face, informing the inquisitorius of Obi-Wan's location and forcing the Jedi to brandish his blaster and destroy the droid. In the resulting firefight, Ferrix and the troopers at the checkpoint fell, before a trio of stormtroopers along with an Imperial officer arrived to aid in the firefight. However, upon their arrival, the stormtroopers were killed by the officer, who in reality was a member of the Hidden Path.

thumb|left|300px|Vader dueled his former master on Mapuzo
Not long after the trio had made their way to a mining town with a spaceport, Darth Vader, three Inquisitors, as well as a squad of stormtroopers arrived to the settlement and began terrorizing and killing random civilians to draw Obi-Wan out. As a result, Obi-Wan made his way to a quarry before Vader revealed himself to his old master, before obi-Wan drew his lightsaber and ran off, causing Vader to follow his master. As Obi-Wan traversed the quarry, Vader then revealed himself from the darkness and swung his lightsaber at Obi-Wan, who deflected the blade with his own, causing a short duel to ensue, which Vader quickly won. As a result, Vader was able to force Obi-wan backwards before then knocking down a storage container filled with flammable rocks,  igniting them with his lightsaber. As he did so, Vader then forced Kenobi into the flames. Momentarily satisfied, Vader then ordered his stormtroopers to seize Obi-Wan before the hidden path member returned and reignited the rock with a shot of a blaster cutting Obi-Wan off from Vader and his troops, allowing him to escape the Empire's clutches. However, Leia, who had made her way to a ship at the town's spaceport, was recaptured by the Empire and brought to Fortress Inquisitorius.

=====Infiltrating Fortress Inquisitorius=====
thumb|right|250px|Leia was brought to Fortress Inquisitorius (pictured)
After being brought to Fortress Inquisitorius, Leia was brought to an interrogation cell, where the handcuffed princess told the stormtroopers guarding her of her importance, though to little avail. Shortly thereafter, the Third Sister entered the room and told Leia that the Empire did not tolerate Jedi sympathizers, before sharing how the inquisitors had uncovered the Hidden Path, before asking for Leia's help in finding the remaining members. In response, Leia asked how Kenobi died, to which the Third Sister stated he had been burned to death, claiming that that members of the Path had abandoned Kenobi, before offering to let Leia return to her family if she reveals where the Path is. However, Leia claimed to not know of the path, causing the Third Sister to repeat her offer. However, Leia continued to defy the inquisitor, causing her to perform a mind probe on the young princess to attempt to extract information. As she did so, Leia released her small droid L0-LA59 as a distraction, though the Third Sister caught the droid, later adding a tracker to it, before sharing that she had a droid of her own when she was younger.

Simultaneously, Tala Durith arrived to the Fortress Inquisitorius' hangar bay disguised as an Imperial officer aboard an Imperial light shuttle, before making her way to a security checkpoint where she claimed she had class C clearance to a security officer, who then scanned her Code cylinder. However, the security officer denied Tala's entry on the grounds that she was outside her sector, to which Tala claimed that she had classified intelligence and threatened to report him to the Grand Inquisitor, convincing the Security Officer to allow Tala in.

Meanwhile, a guarding stormtrooper at port control in the underwater section of the fortress encountered and was quickly overpowered by Obi-Wan Kenobi, who had made his way in underwater using directions from Tala, who was using a viewscreen terminal to guide him in. However, she was stopped by an Imperial officer who recognized that it was not her terminal, who then asked to see Tala's identification. The officer then ushered Tala away, where he was then incapacitated by the poser. Soon after, a patrol of stormtroopers and a seeker droid overheard chatter from Tala through Kenobi's commlink, and quickly investigated, but were then distracted by a force trick from Kenobi.

thumb|left|300px|The Third Sister was suspicious of Tala
Soon after, Leia was brought to a torture chamber and fastened into a torture harness by a pair of stormtroopers, before the Third Sister turned the torture machine on while giving the Princess one last chance to cooperate. However, as she did so, an officer entered the interrogation chamber with a request from Tala for an audience, which the Third Sister accepted. During the meeting, Tala claimed that she was a spy for the Empire in the Path and that the group was operating from Florrum in the Sertar sector, advising the Third Sister to send Imperial forces, but the Third Sister, after questioning how Leia and Kenobi had escaped an Imperial checkpoint on Mapuzo, ordered Tala to be apprehended. However, as Tala was captured, the fortress's klaxons went off as Kenobi, having defeated the stormtrooper guards in the interrogation room and saved Leia, contacted Tala, distracting the stormtroopers guarding her and allowing Tala to break free and defeat them with a blaster.

thumb|right|270px|Stormtroopers guarding Leia were defeated by Kenobi
Simultaneously, stormtroopers guarding the interrogation chamber encountered and were defeated by Kenboi, who then freed Leia, before stormtroopers and a seeker droid chased the pair, the latter of which Kenobi eventually took out. The pair eventually fled into a tunnel surrounded by water on all sides as the Third Sister, a Purge Trooper, and stormtrooper reinforcements closed in, shutting the blast door as they did so. Despite the Imperial troops quickly breaking through, Kenobi allowed a crack on the window which he had held in with the Force to break, flooding the tunnels and taking out the troops.

thumb|left|300px|The Third Sister and Imperial Troops confronted Kenobi, Tala, and Leia in the hanger of Fortress Inquisitorius
Meanwhile, the Fifth Brother, alongside the Fourth Sister, locked down Fortress Inquisitorius, with the former blaming the Third Sister for mishandling the situation. Despite Kenobi, Tala, and Leia reaching the fortress's hanger after, the Third Sister, several Purge troopers as well as stormtroopers caught up with the escapees. The Third Sister denounced Tala as a traitor to the Empire. Tala responded to this, before the Third Sister motioned for the assembled Imperial soldiers to shoot the hostiles. However, a pair of T-47 airspeeders suddenly arrived and strafed the Imperial forces on the platform, allowing the hostiles to flee aboard one such airspeeder, during which Tala and Kenobi defeated several more troopers and a MSE-6 series repair droid. As the airspeeders made their escape, the Third Sister hurled a rectangular explosive at an airspeeder using the Force, destroying the airspeeder and killing its occupant. Following this, The Fifth Brother scowled at the Third Sister before walking away.

====Blockading Ghorman====

By 5 BBY, Krennic found himself faced with numerous scientific setbacks  and forced to testify before the Imperial Senate multiple times over the use of the funding for the "energy program". As a result, Krennic was pressured to turn his attention to sourcing new materials for use in constructing the Mk I Superlaser to be used in the Death Star. One such resource was a rare form of the mineral Kalkite, needed for reactor lens coatings to stabilize the Death Star's energy output, which so far had only been found on the Colonies planet Ghorman, a planet where the Empire had only a small presence.

After working with an engineering officer, Krennic concluded that Gouge mining was required for the extraction of kalkite from Ghorman's crust, a process which was known to stress planet cores and as a result, required the Ghorman people. Through simulations involving Imperial Security Bureau Lieutenant Moy, repopulation tactics such as staging a natural disaster or deadly plague to get Ghorman's population to leave on their own accord was gamed out, leaving the complete suppression of the Ghorman people to silence resistance to repopulation and extraction efforts as the best option for the Empire.

thumb|right|250px|Senator Mothma campaigned for support for the Ghorman people
As such, Krennic worked with Ministry of Enlightenment to begin the suppression of Ghorman, leading to ministry employees Dee Shambo and Nisus Osar arranging the death of an inspector in the Imperial Navy after months of Ghorman noncompliance with Naval inspections to stir Anti-Ghormanism sentiment in the galaxy's population. However, in the aftermath of the Naval inspector's death the Imperial Ruling Council, including council members Ars Dangor and Sly Moore, had the Galactic Empire blockade shipping lanes to Ghorman. As a result, the Ghorman people starved until the blockade was lifted on the order of the Imperial Senate once Senator Mon Mothma rallied enough support for the Ghormans. Despite the blockade being lifted, Ghorman's senator Dasi Oran was faced with the harsh reality that, &mdash;as Ghorman had a single product economy that's export was Ghorman twill&mdash; essentials of survival were imported&mdash; and as such a similar crackdown could spell doom for his people.

===Combating the growing rebellion===
====Eye of Aldhani====

By 5 BBY, the Galactic Empire had made plans for the expansion of the Aldhani dam involving the enslavement of many Dhanis, with Engineering officer Colonel Soden Petigar placed in charge of overseeing the next steps. Despite the Imperial-supported viewing event in the Enterprise Zone drawing many Dhanis away from viewing the revered celestial event known as the "Eye of Aldhani" in the the sacred Valley of Caves, the site of the Aldhani dam, some Dhanis persisted in traveling to the valley. For those Dhanis that still decided to make the ten-day trek to the valley of caves, the Empire's Aldhani Garrison, under the command of commandant Jayhold Beehaz and aware that the Dhanis would refuse, offered transport to the valley from the Lowlands and established Comfort Units along the route, convincing many to abandon the long journey and eventually dwindling the number of pilgrims from five hundred to around sixty.

That same year, Colonel Petigar visited the dam to inspect it for the expansion project, which commandant Beehaz viewed as a way off Aldhani for him and his family. Around that time, TIE/ln space superiority starfighters from Alkenzi Air Base, an airbase located fifty-two klicks from the Aldhani dam, performed patrol flights across Aldhani's Highlands, with one starfighter passing but not spotting the rebel freedom fighters Vel Sartha and Cassian Andor. Later, another another Imperial pilot performed a flyby in their TIE fighter past what they thought was a farm,  which in reality, was a camp serving as a base of operations for the group of rebels Andor and Sartha were a part of, which planned to steal the quarterly payroll of Imperial troops in the Cademimu sector stored at the Aldhani dam. During the planning stages of the heist, one of the team's members, Karis Nemik, wrote a maniesto that would later be spread galaxy-wide in which Nemik theorized that the Empire's need for control was unnatural, its authority was brittle, its oppression was the mask of fear, and as a result, soon enough, the Empire would be overrun with defiance and its control would break.

thumb|left|300px|The rebel infiltrator team kidnapped the Aldhani Dam's head officers and Beehaz's family
On the eve of the Eye of Aldhani, the Imperial officers discussed the Dhani's arrival and the plans for the dam, before the group of Imperial officers went down to the Dhanis to trade a hide with a Dhani chieftain, which the Empire believed to be a way of "leasing" the land from the Dhanis. Shortly afterward, the rebel group, with the help of disgruntled Imperial Lieutenant Gorn, infiltrated the Aldhani dam while disguised as Imperial security troopers and took the Imperial command at the dam and Beehaz's family hostage. While being taken hostage, Colonel Petigar attempted to free Beehaz's son, but was ultimately unsuccessful and was instead shot to death. Holding both the Beehaz and his family at gunpoint in separate locations, Beehaz was the forced to open the vault holding the Imperial payroll as the dam's comms shut down, before the rebel team then had the Imperial staff on the deck load the payroll into the Box freighter parked in the dam.

thumb|300px|right|Alkenzi air base scrambled several TIE fighters to intercept the runaway rebel ship
As Imperial staff loaded the box freighter with the Imperial credits from the payroll, the dam's communications technician Kimzi picked up the rebel team's comlink frequency through the lack of other frequencies and overheard the team's comm chatter, quickly deducing the robbery happening below him. In a quick response, Kimzi gathered a security force to intercept the rebels and made their way to the vault. Upon the troop's arrival there, Gorn attempted to force Beehaz to keep the façade of a "classified mission" and order the men to leave, but Beehaz instead dropped dead from exhaustion, causing a firefight to break out as the rebels made their way into the box freighter with a large portion of the payroll before escaping aboard it. As the box freighter took off from the damn towards the Eye of Aldhani, the lack of response from the Aldhani dam at the nearby Alkenzi Air Base caused the base's command staff to scramble several TIE/ln space superiority starfighters to intercept the freighter. However, as both the fighters and the box freighters entered the crystal belt, the tie fighters were broken apart by the flying crystals while the box freighter successfully navigated the eye, allowing the rebels to escape.

====Imperial Crackdown====

left|thumb|300px|Yularen informed the ISB board of the Imperial response to the Aldhani Heist
In the immediate aftermath of the Aldhani heist, Imperial Security Bureau Major Lio Partagaz ordered that the ISB'S Investigations branch prepare every Star Sector and Planetary Emergency Retaliation plan by the coming midnight. As they prepared the plans, Director of the ISB Wullf Yularen met with Emperor Palpatine to discuss how to proceed. In the end, measures ofa tax equivalent to five times what was stolen from Aldhani for any Sector found to be harboring rebels and the permanent revocation of Imperial tolerance for any custom or festival used as a cover for rebel activity were adopted Empire-wide. Additionally, two bills were introduced by the Emperor to the Imperial Senate and easily passed&mdash; the Imperial Emergency Act, which gave ISB agents the authority to request personnel, data, and material support from the Imperial Military&mdash; and the Public Order Resentencing Directive, which saw all criminal sentenced reevaluated, all outstanding fines and levies ordered to be pain in full immediately, and all offenses towards the Galactic Empire, both direct and indirect, to be treated as a class one offense under the Imperial Penal Code. The related information was communicated to the ISB Board by Yularen directly the same day that the acts passed.

====Lothal rebellion====

By 5 BBY,''Star Wars: Galactic Atlas'' dated the events of ''Star Wars Rebels: The Siege of Lothal'' to 5 BBY separate insurgencies across the Imperial territories had formed but were of little consequence, though the Emperor did foresee a new threat rising against the Empire&mdash;the children of the Force. But the Empire overall did not fear that the various rebel cells could unite and form a more potent menace against the Empire and its interests in the Outer Rim. Imperial Military command maintained a list of known Rebel sympathizers on several Outer Rim worlds, including Lothal, but most of them were not arrested due to their having powerful allies in the Senate, a known hotbed of corruption and decadence.

thumb|right|280px|Mustafar was a volcanic world and Sith sanctuary, where fugitive Jedi were taken to for interrogation, torment, and death.
Among these cells on Lothal were the Spectres, who manned the ''Ghost''.''Star Wars Rebels: Spark of Rebellion'' When rumor of the discovery of Jarrus' Jedi identity and his duty on leading the Spectres began to emerge, the Empire sent the Grand Inquisitor to track him down. The Jedi survivor was to be taken to Darth Vader's fortress on Mustafar, yet in 4 BBY, in a daring battle over Mustafar that marked the first major rebel victory in the Galactic Civil War, the ''Ghost'' crew rescued Jarrus and joined with a growing rebellion.

The rebels, commanded by Ahsoka Tano, were part of a larger rebel movement across the entire galaxy which included several cells, led by Tano and Imperial Senator Bail Organa, and purposely kept in darkness about the existence of one another to prevent information leaks and Imperial crackdowns. Following rumors of an Imperial defeat over Mustafar, spontaneous riots and unrest on several Imperial worlds occurred. The size of the rebellion had also caused concern in the higher ranks of the Empire. With the Grand Inquisitor's death, the Emperor sent his loyal enforcer, Darth Vader, to quash the threat to the Empire's reign.

thumb|left|250px|The Empire stripped Lothal of its natural resources, causing extreme pollution and scattered fires across the planet.
Following the events on Mustafar, Lord Vader imposed a complete lockdown and blockade of the planet as a disillusioned Minister Tua contacted the Spectres to defect to the rebellion, with ISB agent Alexsandr Kallus using this to lure the rebels back to Lothal and to capture them, but Tua was killed during the escape attempt. This prompted Kallus to frame the rebels for her murder and send Imperial forces to search for them. The rebels evaded arrest by hiding in the Imperial Complex only to be met by Darth Vader and a duel; however, the rebels escaped in a stolen shuttle. Vader ordered Kallus to raze Lothal re-settlement camp 43, known as Tarkintown, to punish the locals for accepting help from the rebels.

After breaking the Imperial blockade, Vader attacked the Phoenix Cell fleet that had been sent from the Organa-Tano alliance of rebel cells, who had come to the aid of the Spectres and inflicted high casualties on it, forcing both rebel cells to retreat into hyperspace. With this, the Empire's operations had been a success and while remaining a threat to the Empire even after pushing the rebels off-world, order had nevertheless been restored on the vital world of Lothal and caused a major setback to the rebellion.

====Further rebel activity====

In the aftermath of the victory on Lothal, Admiral Konstantine and the Imperial Navy continued to securing the Outer Rim and also hunting for these rebels. He was accompanied by Agent Kallus, who also had experience dealing with these rebels during the revolt on Lothal who had traveled to the desert planet of Seelos to make contact with several retired clone troopers: Rex, Wolffe, and Gregor and hoped to win them over to their cause but Wolffe who distrusted the rebels sent a coded transmission that was picked up by the ''Relentless''.

thumb|right|250px|A trio of retired clone troopers joined the early Rebellion against the Galactic Empire.
Agent Kallus led a ground assault with three AT-AT walkers. Konstantine remained aboard the ''Relentless'' to render air support to Kallus' forces. However, the clones and rebels joined forces and put up a fierce fight and immobilized Kallus AT-AT walkers. The admiral, however, had been unable to render air support because Lord Vader had ordered him to rendezvous with his shuttle in space, but instead of meeting Vader, Konstantine received another Inquisitor known as the Fifth Brother. When Konstantine raised his concerns that the diversion might have compromised Agent Kallus' mission, the Inquisitor merely replied that his struggles were of no concern to him and pledged to stop the rebels himself.

The rebels later helped deliver relief supplies to the famine-stricken planet Ibaar, which was being blockaded by an Imperial fleet. The Empire had doubled the Ibaarians' work quotas and reduced their rations, creating a famine. The first attempt failed and ended with the destruction of the CR90 corvette transporting the supplies. Still, the rebel network persisted, and the rebels broke through the blockade with the help of a Blade Wing prototype starfighter, which destroyed one of the ''Arquitens''-class command cruisers. This enabled the rebels to deliver supplies to the Ibaarian resistance, which subsequently distributed the supplies. While searching for a missing patrol in the Del Zennis system, Commander Sato, Ezra, and several other rebels were captured by an Imperial Interdictor, a prototype warship equipped with gravity well projectors capable of dragging ships out of hyperspace. In response, Kanan, along with Rex and Chopper, staged a rescue mission which ended with the destruction of the Interdictor, dealing a serious blow to Imperial forces.

thumb|left|250px|Princess Leia Organa of Alderaan feigned loyalty to the Empire while secretly supporting the Rebellion.
Lacking a permanent base, one rebel group&mdash;the Phoenix Squadron&mdash;hid in several spaceports scattered across the planet Garel, but the Empire learned of the rebel presence there and sent a fleet to crush them with most retreating. Following the losses on Garel, Imperial Senator Organa sent his adopted daughter Princess Leia Organa of Alderaan to deliver three ''Sphyrna''-class Hammerhead corvettes to the Rebellion. Since the Alderaanians could not be seen directly supporting the Phoenix rebels, Bail arranged for Leia to deliver the vessels to Lothal, where in secret the rebels would "steal" the ships. However, the local Imperial commander Yogar Lyste had fitted the Hammerhead corvettes with gravity locks, but this failed when the rebels stole the vessel during a skirmish with Imperial forces.

thumb|right|250px|The Rebels captured Fenn Rau, a Mandalorian Protector who served the Empire.
With the Empire hunting down the rebels throughout the Outer Rim Territories, the rebels decided to create a new route through the Lothal sector. Sabine identified the Concord Dawn system as a viable route that the rebels could use. The system was home to the Mandalorian Protectors, a Mandalorian faction that was led by Fenn Rau, a veteran of the Clone Wars. Commander Sato sent Phoenix Leader Hera and Sabine on a mission to negotiate safe passage through the Concord Dawn system with Rau. However, Rau had already aligned the Protectors with the Empire and attacked Hera's mission, seriously wounding Hera and killing at least one Phoenix Squadron pilot. In retaliation, Sabine and Kanan infiltrated the Protectors' camp on the third moon of Concord Dawn and destroyed their Fang-class fighters. The rebels also captured Rau, who agreed to give the rebels safe passage through the Concord Dawn system in return for keeping his capture a secret from the Empire.

====Showdown on Malachor====

thumb|left|250px|Imperial Inquisitors fighting the Jedi and Maul.
Eventually, an Inquisitor called the Eighth Brother was sent to seek a shadow on Malachor, within the depths of the Sith Temple on the planet's surface. At the same time Kanan, Ezra and Ahsoka from the rebellion arrived and immediately recognized him as the former Sith Lord Maul, to who also the Inquisitors confirmed was alive and after the death of the three Inquisitors, Maul turned on his Jedi allies and blinded Kanan. The rebels' problems were further complicated by the arrival of Darth Vader, who had come to take the secrets of the temple for himself. The Jedi removed the holocron from the temple's obelisk, which triggered an implosion that damaged much of the temple. While the two Jedi escaped on the ''Phantom'' with Chopper, Ahsoka stayed behind to hold back Vader. The Imperial mission to Malachor was a partial failure, as both the Jedi and Maul escaped, but Jarrus was blinded in a duel against Maul while Ezra began exploring the dark side, and the rebellion Jedi leadership was broken.

But the rebel cells continued working on growing and expanding as the Spectres conducted a raid on Naraka prison and set out to Reklam Station, where the Empire was dismantling thousands of Republic-era Y-wing starfighters. Imperial security forces failed to prevent both the destruction of the station and the theft of five Y-wings, which were transferred to General Jan Dodonna's unit. Meanwhile, all the increased rebel activity led Governor Arihnda Pryce of the Lothal sector to request the aid of the Seventh Fleet to deal with the Phoenix Group, which was granted by Grand Moff Wilhuff Tarkin and led by Grand Admiral Thrawn, who was promoted for wiping out the rebel presence in the Batonn sector. While Agent Kallus was concerned about the high civilian casualties, Pryce justified Thrawn's actions on the grounds that there were no more rebels there and was given control over the efforts to destroy the growing rebellion before it could become a true threat to the Galactic Empire's reign over the Outer Rim by setting out a strategy.''Star Wars Rebels: Steps Into Shadow''

====Wider engagements with the rebels====

thumb|250px|Thrawn was a leading officer during the growing rebellion.
En route to provide supplies to Teralov, a squadron of A-wings and a transport were attacked by an Imperial ''Arquitens''-class command cruiser that dispatched three TIE interceptors led by Captain Vult Skerris, which quickly wiped out the rebel convoy. Reeling from this loss, the Phoenix rebels dispatched the former Imperial cadet Sabine Wren to infiltrate the Skystrike Academy to extract the disillusioned cadets Wedge Antilles, Hobbie, and Rake Gahree, in which the rebel and defectors would be able to escape from the Empire's grip. Later, the rebels, along with the Free Ryloth movement led by Cham Syndulla, went on a mission to Ryloth, where they learned that Thrawn&mdash;who had studied the tactics used by the rebellion and now had direct command of Imperial forces&mdash;had made military advances led by Captain Slavin in the Tann Province.

The Spectres undertook a supply run to the Agamar to obtain proton bombs from a Separatist transport ship. However, they were captured by a Separatist holdout led by the super tactical droid General Kalani. The droid general wished to end the Clone Wars on his own terms, and challenged the rebels to a battle that would decide the victors, but Imperial forces suddenly arrived and attacked the Separatist ship. The rebels and Separatists came to the conclusion that the Empire was the real victor of the Clone Wars, and decided to unite in order to escape the Empire. While the Imperial Viceroy, Gar Saxon, discovered that the rebels were using the Concord Dawn system to avoid Imperial sector patrols. Saxon destroyed the Protectors' encampment on the third moon of Concord Dawn in an attempt to lure Fenn Rau back.

The Empire had planned to impose martial law on the planet Mykapo which rebels made efforts to evacuate rebel sympathizers. Upon arriving, the flotilla encountered a light freighter, which was engaged in a dogfight with an Imperial advance patrol calling themselves the Iron Squadron. Thrawn, who was aware of this Rebel presence in the system, dispatched a light cruiser to assess the situation, placed under the command of Admiral Kassius Konstantine in order to test the officer's questionable capabilities. The admiral crippled the Iron Squadron's freighter, prompting the crew with the exception of Mattin to escape aboard the ''Phantom II'' with the Spectres. The rebels returned with reinforcements from Phoenix Squadron to rescue Mattin. During the skirmish, Konstantine's cruiser was badly damaged, and most of his forces were destroyed. The rebels fled into lightspeed just as the ''Chimaera'' arrived in the system.

Soon after, the rebels returned to Lothal and began an infiltration of the Imperial Armory Complex to obtain the blueprints for a prototype TIE fighter. However, their mission coincided with a visit by Grand Admiral Thrawn on behalf of Imperial High Command, who was investigating the high rate of sabotage within the factory. The rebels, however, escaped the factory with sensitive Imperial information with the help of the now disillusioned Agent Kallus, who had become an informant for the rebellion. As a result of this rebel attack, Thrawn realized that the Empire had a traitor among their ranks. Following this, there was an increase of the Imperial Navy presence such as capital ships in and around Lothal as part of Imperial orbital defenses. Beyond the Lothal system, rebellious activities increased, such as on Geonosis, where Captain Brunson responded to a triggered proximity sensor and discovered the Spectres vessel ''Ghost'' on the planet who had saved both Saw Gerrera after his Partisans scout team was killed. Hoping to earn herself and her crew promotions, she attempted to destroy the rebels using TIE bombers and rocket troopers, and finally by trapping the rebels in an underground cavern in attempt to bury them alive. When she used her cruiser to block their escape, this backfired, as the ''Ghost'' fired two proton torpedoes, resulting in the destruction of her ship with the rebels who recovered images of the poison canisters that were used for the sterilization of Geonosis in order to show the Imperial Senate and rally more systems to their cause.

Thrawn later dispatched several E-XD-series infiltrator droids to search the Outer Rim for rebel bases. However, Kallus used the rebel identity Fulcrum to warn the base's Chief of Security Garazeb Orrelios about the threat. As a result, he and his fellow rebels Chopper and AP-5 stopped the infiltrator droid EXD-9 from infiltrating the rebel base on Atollon. They turned E-XD9 into an improvised bomb that destroyed a Star Destroyer. Despite their efforts, Thrawn narrowed the search for the rebel base to 94 systems. The Empire lost a local ally in the form of Viceroy Gar Saxon, the Emperor's Hand and puppet ruler of Mandalore. Gar Saxon was defeated during a duel with the rebel Sabine Wren on the planet of Krownest. Saxon's death triggered a power vacuum among the Mandalorians. Sabine then joined forces with her mother, Ursa Wren, and the former Protectors' leader Fenn Rau to reunify the Mandalorians.

Continuing his investigation into the rebel mole, Grand Admiral Thrawn began screening the Imperial sector command staff within the Lothal sector with the help of Imperial Security Bureau Colonel Wullf Yularen, a veteran of the Clone Wars. Thrawn summoned several Imperial officials including Agent Kallus, Lieutenant Yogar Lyste, Captain Brunson, and Commander Brom Titus for questioning aboard his flagship, ''Chimaera''. After learning that Thrawn was intercepting Kallus' transmissions, the Spectres and Rex mounted a mission to rescue Kallus. During the course of the mission, Kallus joined forces with the rebels to delete the planet Atollon, which hosted Chopper Base, from Thrawn's database. However, Kallus elected not to escape with the rebels and instead framed his colleague Lyste as Fulcrum. Thrawn learned of Kallus' deception but kept this information secret since he hoped to manipulate Kallus into uncovering the Phoenix rebel base.

====A united foe====
thumb|left|250px|The Imperial Navy led efforts to counter the Rebel Alliance.
With full-scale rebellion on the horizon, Imperial Senator Mon Mothma would openly betray the Empire by seeking to unite the various rebellions cells into one organization. She began by firstly publicly condemning the reign of Emperor Palpatine after the Ghorman Massacre which led to Commander Vult Skerris leading the effort for her capture in the Archeon Nebula. However, the mission ended in failure, and she was able to escape. This led to her broadcasting a speech to rebels across the galaxy over Dantooine, which led to the formation of various rebel cells into the alliance to restore the Galactic Republic and, along with her resignation from the Imperial Senate, the beginning of a true united rebellion.

===Galactic Civil War===

====Insurgency Rising====
=====Battle of Atollon=====
Soon after its founding, the Rebel Alliance pressed on with the planned operation on Lothal by stealing clearance codes from the Imperial Security Bureau station on Killun 71 to allow their forces to mount a successful attack on the Empire. However, the planned rebel attack on Lothal did not go forward thanks to Thrawn, who had discovered the location of Chopper Base, the headquarters of the Phoenix Group. Thrawn's fleet blockaded Atollon and inflicted heavy casualties on rebel forces. Thrawn launched a ground assault after an orbital bombardment. Meanwhile, Ezra, who had escaped the fighting, enlisted the help of Clan Wren.

In response, Governor Pryce dispatched Jumptroopers, but these reinforcements failed to stop the Mandalorians from destroying the last Interdictor cruiser. Despite Thrawn storming Chopper Base, the rebels and Imperials were attacked by an angry Bendu, an enigmatic being that was living on Atollon, who used his Force powers to devastate the rebel base before being subdued by Thrawn. The surviving rebel and Mandalorian forces fled the battle as the Empire wiped out the Phoenix Squadron; however, the Empire was still unaware of the true scale of the Rebel Alliance. Nonetheless, the routing at Atollon was seen as proof by the rebels that they were not yet ready for open war with the Empire.

=====Mandalorian Civil War=====
Meanwhile, civil war raged on Imperial-occupied Mandalore, with the Rebel Alliance setting out to rescue Sabine's father and Imperial prisoner Alrich Wren from Governor Tiber Saxon. Clan Wren rescued Alrich with the help of the rebels. In response, Saxon unleashed the Arc Pulse Generator known as the Duchess against the Clan Wren forces, killing many. Sabine led the Mandalorians and rebels on a mission to infiltrate Saxon's Star Destroyer, which was above Sundari and were ambushed by Imperial forces, which resulted in the Mandalorians and rebels' success in destroying the weapon and Saxon's flagship.

While not pursuing an agenda of open war, the rebels continued their campaign and mounted successful raids on both Jalindi and the Faos Station. The Empire failed to stop both the Partisan and Spectre efforts, resulting in the loss of Commander Brom Titus and Captain Slavin. On Lothal, the Imperial Security Bureau conducted a successful raid against a suspected rebel cell allied with the Spectres. However, the efforts of the Lothal rebels and their allies brought about the Liberation of Lothal, with Thrawn going missing when Bridger forced himself and the Grand Admiral into hyperspace aboard the ''Chimaera''. At some point, a prisoner uprising was launched within the Cherridan Imperial labor camp, but it was put down in a brutal fashion. A failure for the Empire, however, came when an assault on the Winter's Edge stormtrooper garrison ended in success for the enemy.''Guardians of the Whills''

====The Ultimate Weapon====
=====Destruction of Jedha City=====

thumb|left|250px|The Death Star firing on Jedha City.
A local insurgency was carried out by Gerrera's Partisans on the desert moon of Jedha, an Imperial protectorate, in the ancient streets of Jedha City as part of their larger campaign against the Galactic Empire. Unknown to many of them, Director Orson Krennic and Grand Moff Tarkin had decided to test the capability of the Empire's new superweapon-equipped battle station, the Death Star, by firing its superlaser at the city using a single-reactor ignition. At least 3% of Jedha's Imperial forces were presumed destroyed in the blast as well, having been unable to evacuate. The Imperial casualties included such forces as JN-093's squad, who had been assigned to check possible rebel hiding spots outside the city, leaving them unable to get to the extraction point in time.''Rogue One: A Star Wars Story'' novelization The Empire subsequently fabricated a cover story for the Imperial Senate that Jedha was destroyed in a mere mining disaster.

=====Battle of Scarif=====
thumb|right|275px|Romodi and Tarkin discussing the Battle of Scarif.
A group of rebels under the callsign Rogue One had captured the blueprints for the Death Star, which had just been completed after nearly two decades of work on Scarif. They infiltrated the planetary shield in a stolen ''Zeta''-class Heavy Cargo Shuttle and waged a guerrilla assault on the base's outskirts, drawing away Imperial forces, while the rebels could access the Citadel Tower.

However, they received support from the Alliance Fleet under Admiral Raddus, whose forces engaged the Imperial Star Destroyers above Scarif and aimed to destroy the Shield Gate. Rogue One transmitted the stolen plans to the fleet above, but by the order of Grand Moff Wilhuff Tarkin, they along with Director Orson Krennic were eradicated by a low-powered blast from the arrived Death Star that destroyed the Citadel and surrounding area. By then, the Sith Lord Darth Vader's forces had destroyed the rebel ships that did not manage to retreat, but he failed to get the plans back as they were transported to Imperial Senator and Princess Leia Organa on the ''Tantive IV''.

=====Reveal of the Death Star=====

thumb|left|250px|The Death Star closes in on Alderaan.
Imperial forces commanded by Darth Vader captured one of the leaders of the Alliance and the one who possessed the plans, Princess of Alderaan Leia Organa&mdash;who, unknown to Vader, was his own daughter. While nearly all of the old institutions of the Republic had been swept away in the intervening decades, this provided Sidious the opportunity to finally wipe away the last vestiges of the old democracy, and dissolve the Imperial Senate permanently. This brought governance of the various systems of the Empire directly under the purview of the Regional Governors and the Imperial Military.

Organa's presence, and her refusal to give up the location of the Alliance's base, precipitated Grand Moff Tarkin's decision to test-fire the newly completed Death Star's primary weapon on her homeworld, Alderaan, although historian Beaumont Kin later theorized Tarkin and Palpatine had pre-selected the world as a perfect target for the Death Star. In an instant, the Imperial Military's superweapon utterly destroyed the populous, influential world. In so doing, Tarkin hoped not only to force Organa to submit but also to strike fear into any others who sought to rebel against Imperial rule. Soon after the destruction of Alderaan, dubbed "the Disaster" by Alderaanian refugees, vigils for the dead were held on Coruscant's Level 3204, with many on the level having formerly lived on Alderaan. However, as soon as the circumstances behind the event became clear, the once-peaceful vigils turned into violent riots, with many calling for justice and revolution against the Empire. Imperial stormtroopers and Coruscant underworld police were soon called in to restore the peace, and began arresting and eventually relocating those who questioned Imperial rule.

=====Rescue of Princess Organa=====

thumb|right|230px|The destruction of the Death Star rendered nearly two decades of work and resources wasted, leaving the Empire on the brink of disaster.
Eventually, Organa was rescued from the Death Star by the unlikely alliance of smuggler Han Solo, her unknowing twin brother Luke Skywalker and Obi-Wan Kenobi, who sacrificed himself in his duel with Darth Vader. The group escaped the Imperial fortress and fled to the Alliance base on Yavin 4, pursued by the Death Star. At Yavin 4, the Empire and the Rebels engaged in a major battle, with the fate of the rebellion hanging in the balance. Despite destroying a great many of the Alliance's starfighters, the battle ultimately ended up a major defeat for the Imperial forces, when Skywalker fired the shot which destroyed the Death Star. This marked the Rebellion's first major victory against the Empire.

Now viewing the growing Alliance as a credible threat, Sidious issued a communiqu&eacute; the morning after the Death Star's destruction ordering all ongoing ISB operations be superseded for the immediate detention of known and suspected rebel sympathizers. Admiral Kendal Ozzel ordered the fleet into battle readiness.''Smuggler's Run: A Han Solo & Chewbacca Adventure'' To keep the Rebellion off balance, the Empire engaged in rushed and scrambled offenses across the galaxy and raided spice worlds such as Kerev Doi in an attempt to cut off possible sources of income for the Alliance. With major military redeployments occurring around the clock, the Imperial Military began to mobilize for a full-scale galactic war, while the Rebellion began to push into the populous Imperial Mid Rim in a failed operation that only months later would become known as the Mid Rim Retreat, its ultimate demise owing in large part to the Empire's numerical superiority.

=====Aftermath of Yavin=====

Following losses at Phindar and Portocari two weeks following the Battle of Yavin, members of the Nashtah Squadron learned at the Zero Angle bar on the Bright Jewel Oversector Flight Base on Axxila III that the military would undergo a mass reorganization, rescinding the classification between Imperial Navy and Imperial Army pilots. Unbeknownst to the Empire following the destruction of the first Death Star, the Rebel Alliance had evacuated their base on Yavin 4 and was orbiting the remote world of Orto Plutonia in the Pantora system, located in the Sujimis sector, with the nearest Imperial presence being Moff Abran Balfour, who patrolled the world of Llanic situated at the intersection of the Llanic Spice Route and Triellus Trade Route.

A brief skirmish erupted when Luke Skywalker, in the luxury yacht the ''Desert Jewel'', attacked two TIE fighters assaulting a Kupohan ship. Unknown to Skywalker at the time, the ship was in reality carrying a Kupohan spy with vital intelligence regarding Drusil Bephorin, a Givin woman with a reputation for being able to slice into security systems at an astonishing rate and interpret encoded messages at breathtaking speed. Desperately searching for the Alliance Fleet, the Empire sought to convince Drusil to use her cryptographic skills to aid them and kept her in a sort of luxurious imprisonment on Denon in an effort to sway her favor. Secretly, Drusil offered to join the Alliance as long as the rebels could extract her family to the ocean world of Omereth, a task given to Major Bren Derlin. After a side mission to the Deep Core, Luke Skywalker, R2-D2 and Nakari Kelen extracted Drusil after an elaborate chase across the galaxy, hampering the Empire's plans for a retaliatory strike against the Rebellion.''Heir to the Jedi''

thumb|left|250px|Vader concludes negotiations with Jabba.
In addition to rebel agents wreaking havoc internally, the Empire suffered desultory raids by rebel forces emboldened by their successful strike against the Death Star, with the rebels that destroyed it&mdash;Red Squadron&mdash;continuing to harass the Empire, especially during a mission above Giju where a transport carrying underground rebel leaders was evacuated from the planet. The Empire also continued to suffer setbacks from the Rebellion's golden boy, Luke Skywalker, including the trespass by the Jedi Purge survivor into the Temple of Eedit&mdash;an abandoned Jedi temple under guard of the Empire&mdash;on Devaron.

Despite the temporary turmoil instilled by the Rebels' bold strikes, the Alliance attempted even bigger operations to capitalize on its former success. Most notable was an attempt to assault, infiltrate and destroy Weapons Factory Alpha located in the Corellian Industrial Cluster on Cymoon 1, reputedly home to the largest weapons factory in the galaxy. In the meantime, the Empire opened negotiations with the Hutt Clan, led by Jabba the Hutt, to secure raw materials for Imperial Military production and secure their support for their expansion in the Outer Rim. The Rebels ultimately destroyed the factory, crippling Imperial production and causing another major setback.''Star Wars'' (2015) 1''Star Wars'' (2015) 2''Star Wars'' (2015) 3

=====Vader's punishment=====

For Vader's failure to stop the destruction of both the Death Star and the Cymoon 1 factory, Darth Sidious relieved him of much of his authority and assigned him to serve in the military instead of commanding it. As much of the Empire's military command had been lost with the Death Star, the Emperor appointed General Cassio Tagge, the Chief of the Imperial Army, to the rank of Grand General and assigned him command of Imperial Military matters due to his foresight to fear the Alliance Fleet and doubt the invincibility of the Death Star. The Emperor pressed the military to focus on conquering the Outer Rim and destroying the Rebellion&mdash;with the Death Star gone and the Senate disbanded, the Empire lacked efficient means to keep dissenting systems in line.

Additionally, Imperial statisticians noted predictable increases in piracy following the Death Star's destruction. As a result, the military was to preserve order by any means necessary until the second Death Star was completed. Under Tagge's command, the conquest of the Outer Rim progressed, with Tagge launching a significant crackdown on criminal elements that had gone unchecked in the past. The only criminal powers allowed to survive were the Hutts, per Vader's agreement with Jabba. The destruction of competitors also allowed the Hutts to capitalize on "new markets" supplied by the Empire.''Darth Vader'' (2015) 7 After Doctor Cylo's attempted hijacking of the in-construction ''Executor''-class Star Dreadnought ''Executor'' was put down by Vader, Palpatine demoted Tagge and rewarded Vader with command, which Vader quickly took advantage of by killing Tagge.''Darth Vader'' (2015) 25

====Search for Luke Skywalker====
thumb|right|250px|The rebels had began to make a push to defeat the Empire.
While the Rebellion made a drive to defeat the Empire, Vader meanwhile searched for Luke Skywalker.''Vader Down'' 1 The Empire attempted to pin down rebel activity, but were unable to stop them from seizing control of the ''Harbinger'' from the grip of the Imperial Navy.''Star Wars'' (2015) 22 However, the Empire started a counterattack and prevented rebel guerrilla and military desultory raids that had occurred in the aftermath of Yavin.''Star Wars'' (2015) 24''Star Wars Annual'' (2015) 2''Star Wars'' (2015) 37 Further Imperial success came on the mineral planet Crait, where the Empire confronted the Alliance after an attack on the Alliance Fleet as they searched out a possible new rebel base.''The Last Jedi – The Storms of Crait'' 1

The Rebellion embarked on a massive military campaign to liberate hundreds of worlds under Imperial control by pushing into the heavily populated Mid Rim. With thousands of starships, hundreds of battle groups and dozens of worlds involved in the operation, it was initially met with stunning success as Imperial forces, unprepared for such a large-scale operation and shattered from the recent shake-ups in the Imperial hierarchy, fell back from world to world, allowing the Rebellion to press further into Imperial space. Taking the factory-deserts of Phorsa Gedd and the Ducal Palace of Bamayar, the Rebellion's advance gradually slowed as Imperial resistance stiffened. Eighteen months into the operation, fearing to overextend the fleet and occupied with the consolidation of worlds now under Rebel control, High Command ordered the defense of occupied territories, and shortly thereafter the slow withdrawal of Alliance military resources back towards the Outer Rim.

====Search for the Rebel Alliance====

=====Chasing leads=====

While the loss of both Tarkin and the Death Star itself were significant, Imperial resolve toward putting down the rebellion only increased. For the next three and a half years, Imperial forces under the direct command of Darth Vader relentlessly pursued the Alliance. While the hunt was personal for Vader, having learned that the young rebel Skywalker was actually his son, the Imperial Military nevertheless scoured the galaxy with Imperial probe droids under the name Project Swarm. The operation also made use of a team of archaeological consultants due to the Rebel Alliance's prior uses of ancient structures as bases, with Vader's old contact Doctor Chelli Aphra assigned as part of the group;''Doctor Aphra'' (2016) 37 while her role in preventing the plot to assassinate Emperor Palpatine afforded her a degree of protection from Vader,''Doctor Aphra'' (2016) 38 she believed the Sith Lord was keeping her close and waiting for any good excuse to silence his old loose end. Imperial forces also picked up Aphra and Vader's old assassin droids during a sweep of the Ring of Kafrene, installing restraining bolts on both and assigning them as interrogation specialists on the ''Executor''.

thumb|left|300px|Doctor Chelli Lona Aphra (left) questioned the usefulness of the archaeological side of Project Swarm, whereas Professor Rupo Ud (center) argued in its favor, secretly seeing it as a way to further general archaeological knowledge.
Under the command of Major Yaltza, who was ultimately executed by Vader for a lack of results, and then General Maximilian Veers, Project Swarm saw thousands of probe droids search the galaxy while the archaeologists did their work; whereas Aphra questioned the usefulness of their department, Professor Rupo Ud pushed the theory the rebels would be using another historical site. In secret, Ud did not care about the Empire or rebels at all and simply saw Project Swarm as a way to allocate major resources towards an archaeological survey. After her pleas to Vader fell on deaf ears, Aphra decided to devote herself to finding the rebel base, thereby securing Palpatine's favor and keeping herself out of Vader's grasp forever. After a probe droid was shot down over Ash Moon 1, Veers led a team to the surface to discover only a group of Central Isopter pilgrims, who he ordered be used as target practice, while Ud led the study of the Isopter temple. Intending to take control of the archaeological team, Aphra tricked Ud into falling into a trap and left her ward Vulaada Klam behind, intending to keep the young girl out of her dangerous life.

The only update of interest to Veers came when a masked individual&mdash;who carried rebel rations and claimed to know Jedi mind tricks&mdash;was taken captive and brought to the ''Executor'', where he was unmasked and revealed to be the now-Supervisor Aphra's father, Korin. At the urging of his daughter and due to his bias against the Rebel Alliance due to its habit of ruining ancient sites, Korin revealed he had encountered a rebel cell on Asteroid Helix 13-v, where the two Aphras set to work&mdash;with Korin coming to see some benefits to the Empire's existence if it was directed towards archaeology&mdash;and Vader investigated a presence in the Force, leading him to an altar people had prayed to over the years. The altar made Vader experience visions of his past, but he destroyed it and soon departed, ignoring Korin's pleas to spare the historical site after he ordered bombers annihilate the temple. Although Vader's order to withdraw pulled the Empire off the asteroid before a full sweep could be conducted, with Vader claiming he did so because the rebels had already left, the Aphras had found evidence the rebels had departed for a cold location.

En route to the ''Executor'', the ''Lambda''-class T-4a shuttle carrying both Aphras and BT-1 was attacked by the rebel starship ''Unnamed'' under Aphra's former lover Magna Tolvan, herself a former Imperial''Doctor Aphra'' (2016) 39 who predicted how the stormtroopers aboard would react and incapacitated all Imperials aboard. As the Imperials and Korin were taken captive, Aphra avoided the rebels and extracted the location of their new base&mdash;Echo Base on the planet Hoth&mdash;from Tolvan's electro-tattoos after sleeping with her. She also contacted BT-1 and, after giving the droid permission to kill anyone but her father, ensured her unconscious father was safely deposited back on their Lambda, which she launched with coordinates for Ash Moon I so he could meet up with Klam. Tolvan and the ''Unnamed'' followed close behind, ensuring that Aphra's loved ones could meet each other and become a group of their own.''Doctor Aphra'' (2016) 40 Uniting with Tolvan, Korin&mdash;who abandoned his anti-rebel ideals&mdash;and Klam joined the rebellion and lived in Echo Base.

thumb|right|300px|Death Squadron over the planet Tython during the hunt for Echo Base
Rather than fulfill her previous idea of giving Echo Base's location to the Empire, Aphra led Vader and a group of Imperial forces under Colonel Bryce to the planet Tython, where she freed 0-0-0 and BT-1 from their restraining bolts. With both droids cutting through many of Bryce's troops, Aphra led Vader to the Martyrium of Frozen Tears, where he was overpowered by his past regrets and severely damaged by a barrage from BT-1. Still keeping her distance and knowing she would be unable to kill the Dark Lord, Aphra instead hacked into Vader's suit from a distance and contacted the ''Executor'', where she reached a comms jockey she tricked into altering and outright deleting much of the data collected by Project Swarm: while she knew Vader would soon find the rebel base, she fled Tython with the hope she had delayed his efforts for long enough that the rebels could set up defenses and escape plans, thereby keeping her loved ones safe. The Empire put out a warrant for Aphra, who escaped Tython by stealing a TIE/rp Reaper attack landers and dropped 0-0-0 and BT-1 off on the planet Birukay, where they could stay off the Empire's radar, although both grew bored from a lack of people to kill.''Doctor Aphra'' (2020) 25

Aphra's actions heavily set back the Empire's hunt for the rebellion by, according to Aphra's and the Empire's own estimates, several weeks as it would need to untangle the mess of false positives, deleted information, and altered records she left behind. The Empire tried to bury news of Aphra's interference, but the comms jockey would end up telling an Imperial officer named Thassilio Smeuse, who was, in secret, a deep-cover agent for the Rebel Alliance. One day, Smeuse and the stormtroopers under his command captured a U-wing and a group of seemingly low-ranking rebels, who were actually baiting the Imperials into an ambush; after Smeuse completed the code-phrase one rebel remarked, Tolvan and Strike Team Misericorde ambushed the Imperials and extracted Smeuse. Escaping from three TIE fighters aboard the U-wing, Tolvan and company returned to Echo Base, where Smeuse was debriefed and revealed what Aphra had done.

=====Battle of Hoth=====

By 3 ABY, despite having thousands of droids searching the galaxy, Echo Base's location on the sixth planet of the Hoth system remained unknown to the Galactic Empire. However, that same year, Imperial probe droid XJ9-CS14 was dispatched from a Star Destroyer to that planet. Upon the droid's crash into the planet, rebel forces dispatched Han Solo to investigate, and after a brief skirmish, the droid self destructed after having seen a shield generator. However, aboard the command ship ''Executor'', the flagship of a massive Imperial fleet, not long after, Firmus Piett and another Imperial officer reviewed the footage, and promptly informed Fleet Admiral Kendal Ozzel of the lead. Despite Ozzel protests that the lead did not suggest much, Darth Vader arrived to inspect the lead, and after seeing the shield generator for himself, became certain that it was the rebel base and as such ordered the fleet to travel to the Hoth system.

As the Imperial fleet made it's way to the Hoth system, the rebel alliance in turn, fearing their location was exposed, began to evacuate the base. However, upon the fleet's arrival near the Hoth system, Ozzel made a tactical blunder by leaving hyperspace too close to the system, alerting the alliance to the presence of the fleet and allowing them to raise their energy shield, forcing an Imperial ground assault rather than an orbital bombardment. The blunder cost Ozzel his life at the hands of Vader and command was promptly shifted to the hands of Firmus Piett as the Empire began deploying ground forces to the glacial feature known as Moorsh Moraine.''Battlefront: Twilight Company''

thumb|left|300px|The Empire launched a ground attack on the Rebellion on Hoth.
In the subsequent Imperial assault, Imperial ground forces under the command of General Maximilian Veers, utilizing All Terrain Armored Transport and All Terrain Scout Transport walkers, destroyed the shield generator for Echo Base, before Cold weather assault troopers under the command of Vader entered and overran rebel forces inside Echo Base. During the assault, Solo's ship, the ''Millennium Falcon'', narrowly escaped Vader's grasp and managed to make it to space, before the Imperial fleet in orbit attempted to stop the ship. As such, the Falcon entered the Hoth asteroid field before Imperial TIE/ln space superiority starfighters and TIE/sa tactical bombers followed them in, though the ''Falcon'' eluded the forces due to the high risk involving asteroid fields. With the ship lost, Vader hired several Bounty hunters to locate the ship as an alternative solution, despite the private disapproval of some Imperial officers.

=====Trap on Cloud City=====

One of these bounty hunters, Boba Fett, tracked Organa and Solo to Cloud City on Bespin, enabling Imperial forces to capture them and lay a trap for Luke Skywalker. The trap was eventually sprung, and Skywalker learned of his true relation to Vader, but the Imperial forces escorting Organa and her allies found themselves betrayed and overwhelmed by Cloud City's local authorities. The rebel leaders escaped Imperial custody again, but not without cost. Skywalker was maimed in a duel with Vader, while Solo was frozen in carbonite and handed over to the bounty hunter. Battered and bruised, the Alliance was once again in flight from pursuing Imperial forces. The Empire took full control of Cloud City''The Princess and the Scoundrel'' and Bespin as a whole,''Bounty Hunters'' 3 securing a major source of tibanna gas in the process and further shaking the galaxy's balance of power in its favor.

Around the same time as the takeover of Cloud City, the Empire focused on the ice moon Madurs to secure access to its carnium supply. Initially assuming and told the Empire was interested in the moon's art, much to his confusion, Prime Minister Dreand Yens was told by Imperial ambassador and Senior Commander Alecia Beck to prepare for an art expo as a distraction: as the Empire laid the groundwork for its mining operation, Yens and his people were building up a small city of ice guesthouses at Beck's urging. All the while, an Imperial space station in orbit scouted out where on Madurs would be the best spot to mine, Finally, the Empire made its intentions clear in the next phase of negotiations and offered far less than what the carnium was worth. After Yens's rejection, the space station landed on the moon&mdash;destroying what became known as the "old city" in the process&mdash;to begin extracting the resource by force. An underground resistance network struck against the operation but failed to stop the mining, which began to pollute and threaten the very structure of the moon the further it went on. Despite his hate of the Empire's operations, Yens remained as Prime Minister but was effectively a puppet of Beck. With the way it protruded up from the frozen ground, the station became known as the black tower.

Following the disastrous Battle of Hoth, the Alliance Fleet was scattered across the galaxy, and the absence of clear orders and the condition of Alliance High Command put the movement into its most critical stage in the war effort. With Imperial forces required to maintain the Mid Rim border and combat active war zones, vast numbers of Imperial forces from the Core Worlds were deployed to finally quash the Rebellion in the Outer Rim. This redeployment, however, left the Core's defenses enervated if only by a slight margin. Knowing the Empire's reliance on the Imperial shipyards at Kuat and their vital importance in planetary containment and fast infantry deployment, the Rebel Sixty-First Mobile Infantry launched Operation Ringbreaker, an initiative designed to destroy the Empire's orbital facilities at Kuat. Ultimately, the plan faltered and ended on Sullust owing to logistical concerns.

====Preparation for the end====

In the wake of the Rebellion's catastrophic loss at Hoth, the Rebel Fleet split into small fragments across the galaxy in an attempt to avoid another propaganda victory for the Empire, further extending the Imperial fleet in an effort to engage them. Despite its previous advantages following the Battle of Yavin, the Rebellion was sitting on a knife's edge after learning of Darth Sidious constructing another battle station. Following the loss of the first Death Star, the Emperor made clear his determination to create another planet-shattering space station, this time more powerful than the first.''Moving Target: A Princess Leia Adventure'' The Schism Imperial erupted in the wake of the scourge of the droids.

Utilizing S-thread boosters to carve a secret hyperspace lane through the Outer Rim, the Emperor planned to destroy the rebels in a doomed engagement over the forest moon of Endor, construction site of the Death Star II, which, unbeknownst to the rebels, had a fully operational superlaser. Following the presumed destruction of a sizable portion of the Alliance's military capabilities, the Emperor planned to deploy some of the largest invasion fleets seen in centuries to blockade the known rebel strongholds of Mon Cala and Chandrila until the Death Star could destroy them, eliminating any hope of a successful galactic resistance and thus permanently ending the Alliance to Restore the Republic through terror and intimidation.

====Leaking secrets====
With the Alliance Fleet assembling over Sullust, the Emperor decided to proactively approach the Rebel problem. Rather than guard the station's secrets, as with the first Death Star, Sidious leaked just enough information to bait the Alliance into striking at the station before it was completed&mdash;including the fact that he would be overseeing the final stages of the station's construction personally. After the Bothan Spynet transmitted intelligence regarding the Empire's new and improved Death Star to Alliance High Command, an emergency summit was held on the remote trade world of Zastiga, far from the Galactic Core.

There, Rebellion leaders and generals were informed of the construction of the second Death Star located over Endor which, they knew, had to be destroyed before it became operational. Needing to buy time for the scattered fleet to assemble over Sullust, Princess Leia Organa devised a strategy&mdash;Operation Yellow Moon&mdash;to divert Imperial attention to her instead of the upcoming mission to Endor. Ultimately, with the success of Yellow Moon, the Rebel Alliance gained valuable time for its now-consolidated fleet to finally be able to strike at an incomplete Death Star.

Unknown to the Rebels, large portions of the Imperial Starfleet had already massed in the Hudalla system, while Imperial engineers had ensured that the new Death Star's main weapon was fully operational. Eventually, Imperial Military command had discreetly moved the gathered warships to a staging point on the far side of Endor's moon, where the Death Star was orbiting. Simultaneously, a legion of Imperial troops was deployed on the surface to stop any attempt at sabotaging the station's ground-based SLD-26 planetary shield generator, which neutralized any attempt at directly assaulting the station.

====Battle of Endor====
thumb|right|230px|The Alliance strike team is captured by the Emperor's troops.
Imperial intelligence reports indicated that Sidious' trap was indeed well underway when it was discovered that the Rebel fleet was massing at Sullust, as a staging ground for their strike at Endor. Per the Emperor's design and command, Imperial Military authorities were ordered to ignore the buildup so that the Rebels would commit their entire force to a doomed attack. When the Alliance fleet arrived en masse, the Emperor's trap was sprung. The Rebel ground forces had taken the bait and been captured, allowing the Death Star's shield to remain active, while the Imperial fleet moved into position to trap the Rebels. With the Alliance Fleet trapped between the bulk of the Imperial fleet and a shielded, fully operational Death Star, victory for the Empire seemed assured.

On the surface of Endor, the tables were turned on the Imperial forces when they were unexpectedly attacked by the planet's indigenous Ewok population, who had allied themselves with the Rebels, giving the Alliance ground forces a free hand to destroy the Death Star's shield generator. With the shield down, Alliance starfighters were able to launch an assault on the Imperial station's reactor core.

thumb|left|270px|The Rebel fleet and the Imperial fleet engage each other.
Meanwhile, aboard the station, a blow of an entirely different kind was struck against the Empire. The Emperor tried to replace Vader with a captive Luke Skywalker, the latter now being a Jedi, but Luke convinced Darth Vader to turn on his master. Vader&mdash;once again Anakin Skywalker&mdash;seized the Imperial head of state and hurled him down a shaft to his assumed death. Soon after, the Rebel starfighters destroyed the Death Star's reactor core. The station was destroyed&mdash;like its predecessor, lost with all hands. Due to the injuries he sustained in the process of overthrowing the Emperor, the redeemed Anakin died shortly after, but not before making peace with Luke. With the apparent loss of both the Emperor and his right-hand man, Vader, the destruction of the Death Star, and significant losses inflicted on the Imperial fleet, the Imperial remnants withdrew to the Annaj system. The Empire had suffered a decisive defeat.

===Fragmentation of the Order===

====Shattered Empire====

thumb|right|250px|The Rebel assault against the Imperial outpost on Endor, the day after the Death Star II's destruction.
With the destruction of the Death Star and death of the Order's totalitarian ruler, many worlds across the galaxy began to celebrate the Empire's defeat over Endor with the incorrect notion that the war was over''Shattered Empire'' 1 and rise up against the regime. Despite being at the heart of the Empire, the Imperial Center would also see tumultuous festivities by its populace, eventually leading to a riot breaking out in Monument Plaza, which further coalesced into a full-scale civil war. A rally was held on Naboo while parades''Star Wars: Return of the Jedi'' junior novelization and other celebrations were held on Tatooine, which saw its Imperial occupiers withdraw. The recent death of Jabba the Hutt, combined with the Imperial withdraw, did create a power vacuum on Tatooine that groups like the Mining Collective could take advantage of, however.

Meanwhile, the Empire rushed to reassert its power. One particular tactic the Empire would focus on was trying to keep control over resources. To that end, the Empire continued its secret mining project on Madurs. The Rebel Alliance also suspected Imperial holdouts would dig into the Outer Rim, thereby drawing out the war. Beyond fearing covert attacks on Alliance-allied star systems, with the number of pro-Alliance worlds growing in the wake of Palpatine's death, and the battles that were to be waged in the Outer Rim, the Alliance feared the Empire would act in the shadows to destabilize the bedrock upon which the New Republic would be formed: assassinations, starvation, and control over resources like fuel, such as Tibanna gas, and food were all tactics the Alliance suspected would be used by the Empire in the coming weeks.

thumb|left|300px|The Galactic Empire that once stood united under Palpatine fractured and divided without a clear leader as various candidates squabbled and fought for the throne.
Owing to the lack of a clear system of succession following the Emperor's death, chaos gripped the galaxy as former Imperial expansionism stalled. Members of the Imperial Council and various other military warlords attempted to grab what territories they could, while tailored propaganda messages often contradicted one another. Some refused to legitimize the New Republic, and thus banned referring to it by name. Others portrayed it as a monstrous terrorist organization, swallowing up Imperial worlds for plunder and conquest, while still others refused to even acknowledge the Emperor's death for months. The Empire was ripped apart from within as several of its commanders fought one another for power, leadership, and control, rendering the regime a collection of squabbling factions: with the Empire weak, it was no match against the united forces of the New Republic. The chaos that ensued in the Empire made people wonder if the decisions made by the Emperor over the years were the best for the Galactic Empire. Imperial pilot Rella Sol, for example, the child of former Imperial Senators, believed that if the Imperial Senate had not been dissolved, order would have been maintained after Endor.

An Imperial loyalist, Governor Adelhard, who was in charge of the Anoat sector, attempted to downplay the Empire's defeat over Endor and cover up the Emperor's death in the days after the Battle of Endor. Shutting down all travel and communications into and out of the Anoat sector, Adelhard established the Iron Blockade and formed his own remnant faction. Citizens who dared to fight back and speak of so-called rumors of the Empire's defeat were hunted and eliminated by Commander Bragh and his Purge Troopers. By keeping control over the Anoat sector, the Empire also kept control over a massive supplier of the galaxy's Tibanna gas, thereby keeping a great deal of control over fuel. While some such as Grand Moff Lozen Tolruck of Imperial territory G5-623 on Kashyyyk suggested that the Emperor had escaped the Death Star II through miraculous means, others claimed the even wilder notion that the Emperor was still leading the Empire from beyond the grave. While Solo thought such a lie was easy to disprove, such a tactic was possible because Palpatine had always ruled from the shadows, away from the public eye.

During Solo and Organa's honeymoon, they discovered the Empire's carnium mining operation on Madurs and fought against it with the help of the local resistance. The battle ended with the destruction of the "black tower" and the capture of Beck, who fled with other high-ranking officers on Madurs as the resistance launched its final attack. The out-of-character move from Beck led Organa to suspect the New Republic had a new enemy at play, either a figure using the rumors of Palpatine's survival to their advantage or an heir to the Empire with Palpatine's level of power. Fortunately for Madurs, the New Republic embarked on an effort to restore the world after the damage caused by the Empire's mining.

====Operation: Cinder====

thumb|right|250px|The Alliance assaults Imperial positions on Sterdic IV.
With the Empire fragmented, the Rebel Alliance embarked on numerous campaigns such as the Beltire Liberation and the Battle of Cawa City''Shattered Empire'' 2 to capitalize on its stunning success over Endor, resulting in numerous Imperial defeats. Twenty days after Endor, the posthumous contingency plan of the late Emperor known as Operation: Cinder was delivered to numerous Imperial captains by messenger droids''Shattered Empire'' 3 as the first act in Palpatine's Contingency.''Aftermath: Empire's End'' The operation consisted of coordinated attacks on strategic worlds affiliated with the Rebellion, which the Emperor considered a final act of revenge against his enemies,''Star Wars: The Secrets of the Sith'' and worlds that had been loyal to him, as revenge for the Empire's failure to protect him. In addition to his homeworld of Naboo, Burnin Konn, Candovant, Abednedo, and Commenor were all targeted for destruction through the use of climate disruption arrays. Utilizing N-1 starfighters dating thirty-six years earlier to the Battle of Naboo, the Alliance destroyed the satellites with the aid of an MC80 Star Cruiser and the Alliance Fleet. Despite the Order's defeat over Naboo, the Empire still attempted the operation on numerous worlds in the three months following the Battle of Endor.''Shattered Empire'' 4

After the Battle of Endor, illicit holovids of the Emperor's defeat over Endor and rebel propaganda detailing the liberation of worlds such as Naboo disseminated throughout the galaxy, with many risking arrest and execution for spreading what the Empire deemed lies. However, the increasing view that the Empire was weakened, reinforced by the insistence of authorities claiming otherwise, prompted thousands of planets to join the Alliance, while Imperial Military defections steadily increased. In order to counter the reports of the Emperor's demise, a proxy actor was installed in his place, but some citizens noticed slight differences in the facsimile. Eventually, the truth of the Emperor's demise became known to the general citizenry. Declarations of a new Emperor were announced almost every day, but none were able to consolidate any substantial power. Former aide to Darth Sidious since the Clone Wars, Grand Vizier Mas Amedda attempted to keep the Empire together while splinter fleets and other Imperial officials fought each other to support the various claimants to the throne.

====Birth of the New Republic====

thumb|left|250px|The continuing fall of the Empire allowed the Rebel Alliance to reorganize into a true government, the New Republic.
Eventually, the Galactic Empire had to contend with the New Republic, a rival galactic government formed in the wake of the Rebel Alliance's victory at Endor. Suffering a string of defeats against the Republic including the loss of Sevarcos and Malastare, along with a failed attempt to restart the former Separatist droid foundries on Geonosis, the Empire gradually began to crumble. Self-appointed Grand Moff Valco Pandion and other military leaders began to jockey for power, while corrupt sector governors accepted payments for the Republic's allocation of Imperial ships or sued for peace at the earliest convenience. The captains of two of the Empire's thirteen ''Executor''-class Star Dreadnoughts even surrendered to the New Republic.

With most of the Empire's veteran troops killed on the second Death Star or Vader's command ship ''Executor'', military paucity and tactical clumsiness soon hampered the Empire's efforts at a concerted strike against the Republic. The Imperial Military suffered numerous losses of warships and troops, and expended more ordnance than it could produce fighting Republic forces. This ultimately led to a supply deficit forcing ''Imperial''-class Star Destroyers to make do with an inadequate supply of TIE/LN starfighters and resulted in both the Imperial Navy and Imperial Army utilizing undertrained personnel pulled early from the numerous Imperial academies. Consequently, many planets were either captured by or seceded to the New Republic. The Empire retreated to fallback positions on worlds such as Naalol, forestalling its slow push toward the Core Worlds. Despite these efforts, the Republic had already established its capital on Chandrila, a planet located within the Core.

====Conference on Akiva====

Despite the lack of a clear chain of command, old loyalists and a common fear of the rising Rebellion kept a vague semblance of unity between the surviving Imperial forces. Existing on a knife's edge, many officers wondered when someone of prominence would break away from commonality and begin to overtly act against the greater body, ushering in chaos and anarchy. To avoid this, the surviving Imperial leaders and their military forces converged on the Outer Rim planet of Akiva in an attempt to evade New Republic detection and stabilize the remaining factions of the Empire in the months following Endor, with various portions of the Outer Rim still occupied by Imperial forces. During the Akiva summit, various Imperial delegates discussed the future of the Empire in the aptly named Imperial Future Council.

Amid the conference, the various Imperial leaders were divided over how the Empire should deal with their newfound situation, and whether or not it would be wise to continue the war or enter into a state of cold war. Additionally, the continued funding of the Imperial Military was hotly disputed, with some arguing that plundering the InterGalactic Banking Clan and other monetary bodies would plunge the galaxy into an economic depression. The notion of abandoning the Empire's dark-side devotion was even discussed, while Imperial Advisor Yupe Tashu&mdash;a longtime admirer of Darth Sidious and dark-side cultist&mdash;suggested sending the Imperial remnants to the outskirts of the galaxy to search for the source of the dark side. With the more pressing objective to organize and thus strike out against the New Republic before it could grow any stronger, the delegates soon began discussing who should lead the Empire as the new Galactic Emperor.

====Rebellion on Akiva====

Before any real progress could be made, Akiva was ultimately liberated after a New Republic fleet arrived, forcing the Imperials to scatter once more and resulting in Akiva being the first Outer Rim planet to formally join the New Republic. In reality, Imperial Fleet Admiral Gallius Rax, a warlord who controlled one of the larger fragments of the fallen Empire.

The man who became Gallius Rax was an orphan boy called "Galli" who had stowed aboard Palpatine's luxury yacht ''Imperialis'' roughly three decades before the end of the Galactic Civil War. Seeing potential in the boy, Palpatine tasked him with guarding an excavation site in the Valley of the Eremite which became the Jakku Observatory. After ten years of service, Palpatine inducted Rax into the Empire, using his power and influence to aid Rax's career advancement in the Imperial Navy. By 5 ABY, Rax had attained the rank of Fleet Admiral.

With the loss of Akiva and the Galactic Empire's territorial possessions rapidly shrinking, Rax became an official advisor to Grand Admiral Rae Sloane. While Sloane was the public leader of the Empire in the Vulpinus Nebula, its true ruler was Rax who controlled the fleet through Sloane. Additionally, Rax secretly commanded the Imperial remnants in the Almagest, the Recluse's Nebula, the Queluhan Nebula, the Ro-Loo Triangle, and the Inamorata. As part of the Contingency, Rax eliminated his Imperial rivals by leaking intelligence to the New Republic while posing as "the Operator." With Sloane's help, Rax had engineered the downfall of the Imperial Future Council's emergency summit on Akiva.

Roughly two months after Akiva fell to the New Republic, numerous systems left the Empire or waged their own resistance movements, declared their independence, and established their own fiefdoms or joined the New Republic. In that time, Sullust had also been liberated from Imperial control. In that same time period, Imperial forces launched three invasions of the planet Naboo, which holdout forces hoped to claim due to its significance as Palpatine's homeworld. However, all three attacks were repelled by the New Republic, which even received help from Imperial defectors. Meanwhile, criminal syndicates flourished in the current atmosphere of conflict, especially the reptilian pirate Eleodie Maracavanya, who had captured the Super Star Destroyer ''Annihilator'' and used it to forge zher own criminal empire. Several Moffs and governors rebelled against the Empire as more people grew uncertain about what the Empire stood for. Agencies, personnel, and whole planetary systems started to drift apart, each adopting different tactics and methods for combating the New Republic, and each other.

====Desperate times====

Grand Vizier Mas Amedda was acting as Emperor after Palpatine's death but in reality was nothing more than a proxy Emperor who held little real influence beyond the throneworld of Coruscant with his reign being met with whole sectors of Coruscant started to revolt and was entrenched in government districts. Rax refused to allow Sloane to send reinforcements to Amedda as the throneworld had no place in his vision of a renewed Empire. Later he met with Chancellor Mon Mothma and Senator Leia Organa, who refused his surrender during a meeting on Velusia and demanded he instead find a way to gain full control of the Galactic Empire and ordering him to work towards signing a treaty of surrender to clear his name.

Upon his return to Coruscant, Amedda considered suicide by jumping off of one of the Imperial Palace's balconies. However, he changed his mind after meeting Sloane. After Sloane inquired about the identity of Fleet Admiral Gallius Rax, Amedda decided to strike an alliance with her. In return for assisting her investigation into Rax's background, Amedda agreed to align with Sloane. Sloane believed in the New Order that developed after the Clone Wars as opposed to Rax, who wished for a renewed Empire ruled by the dark side as it was under Darth Sidious. Following their agreement, Amedda revealed the droids that contained the information she sought were aboard the wreckage of the ''Imperialis'' on the junk moon Quantxi.

As the war grew more desperate, TIE fighter pilots even began suicide attacks on entrenched Republic positions, and various commanders executed wholesale massacres of native populations. The HoloNet, now free of Imperial censorship, brought such atrocities to the public spotlight. Other Imperial officials went AWOL and holed up in distant, hyper-secure outposts to avoid the New Republic Tribunal and its sentencing of Imperial war criminals. Additionally, the Emperor's Super Star Destroyer, the ''Eclipse'', had disappeared from the galaxy.

===Empire's End===
====Rax's game====

Despite the post-Endor Rebel Alliance's fears that the Empire would dig into the Outer Rim, the Empire was largely defeated in the region by the time Rax called for a meeting of select Imperials in the Vulpinus Nebula. The Exterior under Grand Moff Randd remained the only Outer Rim sector that could truly be described as under the Empire's control. However, while the Empire appeared to be receding as the New Republic grew in size, Rax consolidated more and more systems to his cause&mdash;a faction of Imperials identified as the loyalists''Victory's Price: An Alphabet Squadron Novel''&mdash;after staging the Imperial Future Council to eliminate his rivals. A protégé of the late Emperor, Rax saw the Empire of old as weak, corrupt, and overripe. To him, by allowing the New Republic to gain ground, he not only eliminated potential competition but consolidated the leftover pieces of the Order.

With the shipyards of Kuat, Xa Fel, Anadeen, and Turco Prime already lost or contested, Rax planned to use the Empire's last foothold in the Outer Rim as a "strangling cord" to tie around the New Republic. While the old Empire relied on third-party corporations to produce its military hardware, Rax had nationalized all aspects of the production chain to be solely Imperial. To conclude his plan, Rax founded the Shadow Council in the Vulpinus Nebula after rescuing the final member of the council, Brendol Hux, from Arkanis. This "Shadow Council" was to serve as a secret advisory board composed of the "best and brightest," with the ultimate motive of secretly guiding the Empire into a new golden age.

====Crisis on Chandrila====

Roughly three months after the Battle of Akiva, Rax sent Rae Sloane on a mission to the New Republic's capital with the overtures of signing a peace treaty who reassured her that her mission to Chandrila would cement her role as Emperor. The signing coincided with the New Republic's celebration of Liberation Day, a holiday celebrating the release of captives from the Imperial prison Ashmead's Lock on Kashyyyk, with many of the captives having been held in suspended animation since the days of the early Rebellion. In reality, the survivors were a part of an elaborate assassination scheme by Rax, executed by his lackey, Windom Traducier&mdash;an undercover Imperial operative posing as a Senate Guard&mdash;by utilizing inhibitor chips that had been installed within the survivors' brains. As the New Republic officials shepherded the liberated prisoners and their families onto a stage, Rax ordered Grand Moff Randd to prepare the Imperial fleets to travel to a series of coordinates, which turned out to be the planet Jakku. Rax also convened a meeting of the Shadow Council.

The survivors attacked and fired on the crowd after the chips' activation by Traducier, with the survivors targeting Chancellor Mon Mothma and various members of the Republic military during a dedication speech to their rescue. Watching the carnage from the balcony, Sloane realized that this terror attack was the "attack" Rax had foreshadowed to her. Already disagreeing on Rax's methods for administering the Empire, Rae announced her intention to confront Rax aboard the ''Ravager'' to her aide, Adea Rite, a secret supporter of Rax. As a result, Rite attempted to assassinate Sloane, but she escaped off-world. Traducier freed Tashu from the Republic and told him that he still served the late Emperor Sheev Palpatine even after Rax had given himself the title of Emperor. The attacks demoralized the New Republic but failed to turn the tide of the war against the Empire, which lost Kashyyyk following an uprising led by Han Solo and Chewbacca.

====The Contingency====

Claiming that Sloane had been captured during the attack on Chandrila, Gallius Rax seized power as the self-styled Counselor to the Empire. When Borrum asked why they were traveling to the barren world of Jakku, Rax responded that he wanted to "test" the mettle of his new armada above the planet. In secret, Rax planned to eliminate the other Council members with the exception of Brendol Hux as part of the Emperor's posthumous Contingency. Unbeknownst to the Empire, its destruction had been planned by the Emperor who did not believe that the Empire should continue after his demise. He also deemed the Empire's downfall as a necessary outcome for the creation of a new order that would rise in its place. Determined to see his plans realized, Sidious entrusted Rax with the task of executing the Contingency and ensuring its success.''Aftermath: Empire's End''

Meanwhile, Sloane joined forces with the former rebel Brentin Lore Wexley to hunt down and kill Rax. While Sloane had received information from the bounty hunter Mercurial Swift that he had discovered that Rax had come from Jakku, the two traveled to the desert planet. After landing, Brentin and Rae visited a bar owned by Corwin Ballast in an attempt to find information about Rax. Ballast yielded no information, but the pair soon got their answer when they witnessed Rax's Super Star Destroyer ''Ravager'' exiting hyperspace with his massive Imperial armada. The Emperor had returned home.

====Build-up to Jakku====
=====Assorted formations and forces arrive=====

thumb|right|250px|The ''Imperial''-class Star Destroyer ''Inflictor'' crashes onto the surface of Jakku.
With the support of the Shadow Council, which included Grand Moff Randd, General Hodnar Borrum, the propagandist Ferric Obdur, and the former Commandant Brendol Hux, Counselor Gallius Rax led the Imperial loyalist forces to his homeworld of Jakku. These forces consisted of a fleet of Imperial Star Destroyers as well as Rax's flagship, the ''Ravager'', purportedly the last remaining Super Star Destroyer in the Imperial Navy. Admiral Garrick Versio also joined the Imperial loyalists on Jakku, adding his Star Destroyer, the ''Eviscerator'', to Rax's fleet. The fleet also possessed Interdictor vessels, Immobilizer 418 cruisers, ''Lambda''-class shuttles, TIE line starfighters, TIE bombers and interceptors, TIE strikers, Twenty-gun raiders, and a TIE Defender. Other loyalist units included the 204th Imperial Fighter Wing, which was not actually based on Jakku to instead carry out a second Operation Cinder against rogue Imperials, the Hellhound attack force,''Star Wars: On the Front Lines'' and Omega Flight Group.''Star Wars Battlefront'' Though united in a final stand against the New Republic, the remnants of the Imperial forces were unaware that they were to be sacrificed as "penance for their negligence," as the Emperor believed that they had failed in their duty to protect him.

The infantry comprised standard stormtroopers along with the requisite specialist troops such as Demolition Troopers, Heavy Weapons Stormtroopers, Imperial officers, jumptroopers, riot control stormtroopers, scout troopers, Imperial shock troopers, sandtroopers, and at least one member of the Emperor's Royal Guard.''Bloodline'' These ground forces were supported by several types of military vehicles including All Terrain Armored Transports, All Terrain Scout Transports, and a K79-H20 Imperial Troop Transport. Imperial forces, including the stormtrooper TK-603, stationed at the Rothana Imperial Shipyards abandoned the station to head to Jakku, leaving with every operational ship in the base. Any ship not ready for battle, including Tarkin's old flagship the ''Carrion Spike'', was left behind under the guard of the auto-security and droids.''Poe Dameron'' 9

Rax established the main Imperial base beyond the Goazon Badlands and the Sinking Fields; the base housed a stormtrooper garrison and a large number of walkers. Other known Imperial facilities included an Imperial research base, the Jakku Observatory, and a remote Kesium gas rig. Unknown to the Shadow Council, the Jakku Observatory was central to the late Emperor Palpatine's Contingency plan to destroy the Empire in the event of his death. The Observatory contained computer-generated maps of the Unknown Regions and was built on top of a borehole that led to the planet's core. Rax planned to detonate the core in order to destroy Jakku along with much of the Empire and the New Republic Defense Fleet. Then he intended to lead a select group of Imperials whom he deemed worthy of joining him in the Unknown Regions to rebuild the Empire. Rax's forces included a contingent of child soldiers who were recruited from local orphans.

=====Mental toll of Jakku=====
In public, Counselor Rax claimed that he had brought the Empire to Jakku in order to toughen and harden them for their final showdown against the New Republic. Rax instituted a brutal training regime which encouraged savagery and violence among the Empire's soldiers and officers. In training sessions, officers egged their men to maul each other. Dissenters like RK-242 who questioned what the Empire was doing on Jakku were brutalized by their comrades for questioning Rax's agenda. The stormtroopers stationed on Jakku degenerated into armed thugs who developed an unkempt appearance due to the harsh, arid climate.

thumb|left|250px|The Galactic Empire made its final stand against the New Republic on Jakku, the homeworld of Gallius Rax.
For months, the Empire's loyalist forces waited for the New Republic to launch its attack. The prolonged state of alert began to take a toll on the Imperial forces based on Jakku. While General Borrum expressed concerned that the long wait was beginning to affect the sanity of his men, Grand Moff Randd supported Counselor Rax's harsh regime as a purification process. During that time, Rax also struck a deal with the Hutt crime lady Niima, who was the leader of a cult. In return for supplying weapons, Niima guarded the path to the Valley of the Eremite and kidnapped local orphans. These orphans were trained by Commandant Hux into Rax's personal guard of child soldiers, which he hoped would become the template of his new Empire in the Unknown Regions. Prior to the New Republic's arrival at Jakku, Rax gave command of the children to Armitage Hux, the Commandant's illegitimate son.

====Imperial civil war====

thumb|right|250px|Colonel Soran Keize, who pursued non-loyalist Imperials for treason
Meanwhile, New Republic forces launched mopping-up operations against Imperial holdouts on Kashyyyk and Cloud City. The mass withdrawal of loyalist fleets to Jakku also ceded a great deal of territory to the New Republic, which continued to do battle with the opportunists and warlords who stayed behind. As noted by Admiral Ackbar, while the campaign to root out such holdouts would take time, they were isolated without the core strength of the Empire's loyalists. Few of those holdouts posed any kind of major threat to the New Republic, which also moved to crush whatever transport and fleet-building abilities those holdouts had left. Elsewhere in the galaxy, amid the conflict with the New Republic, loyalist Imperial forces turned their guns against the rogue factions in a second Operation: Cinder, effectively creating a whole new war of its own in the opinion of General Syndulla. The loyalist 204th Imperial Fighter Wing carried out punishments operations, such as the attack on Kortatka and Attack on Dybbron III, during the campaign.

Following the attack on the ''Diamond Tor'', the loyalist 204th Imperial Fighter Wing was deployed against the Yomo Council of the planet Fedovoi End, where half a million rogue troops and their families resided. The "treasonous actions"&mdash;as they were called by the loyalist Colonel Soran Keize, at least&mdash;of the Yomo Council included refusing to obey Sloane when she ordered they direct assets into the D'Aelgoth sector, not recognizing Amedda's regency over Coruscant, and an alliance with the Shiortuun Syndicate. In response to such actions and after Keize granted those disloyal to the Yomo Council a chance to escape, the 204th Imperial Fighter Wing was dispatched to Fedovoi End, where TIE fighters bombarded the planetary ice caps until released gases poisoned the entire world, wiping out numerous civilians and soldiers alike. Imperials who took Keize's offer&mdash;such as Major Njock, who claimed to have always opposed the Yomo Council's treason&mdash;would join the 204th or be dispatched to Jakku.

====The New Republic discovers Jakku====
thumb|left|300px|The Imperial Military marshals on Jakku ahead of the final battle of the Galactic Civil War.
Norra Wexley and her team discovered the Imperial presence on Jakku after the New Republic's countless probe droids had failed to. Her son Temmin Wexley and the former Imperial loyalty officer Sinjir Rath Velus reported Norra's findings to the New Republic government on Chandrila. In response, Admiral Ackbar dispatched the scouting ship ''Oculus'' and several probe droids into the Jakku system to corroborate Temmin and Sinjir's information. The scouting party found that much of the Imperial fleet had indeed retreated to Jakku and were consolidating in a defensive arrangement. Despite some political obstruction in the Galactic Senate, Chancellor Mon Mothma passed a resolution dispatching the New Republic Starfleet to Jakku.

Rax captured his rival Sloane and the former rebel operative Brentin Lore Wexley, who had teamed up with Sloane to stop Rax. After capturing them, Rax gave a test demonstration of his child soldiers. As a symbolic act of his plan to tear down the Empire and start a new regime, Rax ordered his child soldiers to execute a contingent of stormtroopers. Following the demonstration, Rax imprisoned Sloane and Brentin. With the New Republic fleet entering the Jakku, Rax delivered a rousing speech claiming that the coming battle would be the Empire's final stand against the New Republic.

====Battle of Jakku====
=====Zero Hour=====

thumb|right|250px|The battle of Jakku was intended to destroy both Imperial Forces and New Republic forces alike
The Battle of Jakku commenced a year and four days after the Battle of Endor. With the Empire controlling most of the galaxy's major shipyards, the Republic sought to expand their fleet by capturing Imperial vessels, along with destroying a secret Imperial weapons facility on the planet. However, Rax secretly plotted for both New Republic and Imperial forces to destroy each other during the battle, and intentional brought enough firepower to allow both forces to wipe each other off the map and restart the game. Simultaneously Grand Moff Ubrik Adelhard assembled his coaltion prepared his final revenge against the Empire and New Republic for treating him like a pawn.''Battle of Jakku — Last Stand'' 3

As New Republic forces arrived to Jakku, the Imperial Fleet in orbit around Jakku, under the command of Grand Moff Randdid, strategically positioned the fleet's Executor-class Star Dreadnought ''Ravager'' behind a defensive perimeter of Star Destroyers which would periodically open formation to allow the ''Ravager'' to bombard the New Republic fleet with turbolasers and missiles while forcing the opposing fleet, under the command of Admiral Ackbar, to break the perimeter to reach the dreadnought and the ground. Meanwhile on the surface of Jakku, Imperial ground forces under the command of General Borrum defended Imperial ground facilities from assault by New Republic forces under the command of General Tyben and Lieutenant General Brockway.

thumb|left|250px|The fall of the ''Ravager'', considered the symbolic end of the Imperial Era
As the battle progressed, Imperial forces in space managed to hold the line against the New Republic fleet despite it's Mark One Starhawks, until a blunder by Captain Groff of the Star Destroyer ''Punishment'' panicked and rammed his starship into the Starhawk ''Amity'', blubndering the Imperial strategy by creating a hole in the Imperial defenses. As the starhawks began to break through the Imperial wall and entered a delicate situation for both parties, Adelhard arrived to the battle aboard his flagship ''Scepter'' and announced that he had arrived to destroy both sides to both factions as his ship were supposed to open fire. However, Adelhard was betrayed by the Spice Runners of Kijimi in his moment of victory, allowing the fighting between New Republic and Imperial forces to continue as his flagship was destroyed.''Battle of Jakku — Last Stand'' 3 With the Imperial space formation now in chaos, at the urging of Admiral Ackbar, the severely damaged Starhawk ''Concord'' took advantage of the Imperial opening to attack the ''Ravager'' directly. Charging at the ''Ravager '', the ''Concord'' utilized it's powerful tractor beam projector to drag the ''Ravager'' down into Jakku's atmosphere as Ackbar then dispatched several New Republic ships and fighters to knock out the Super Star Destroyer's engines, turning the tide of battle in the favor of the New Republic. A a result, as the ''Ravager'' crashed into the sands of Jakku, so rose the New Republic, ushering in the the symbolic end of the Galactic Civil War, the end of the Imperial Era, and the dawn of the New Republic Era.''Battle of Jakku — Last Stand'' 4

thumb|right|250px|While skirmishes continued on Jakku, the Galactic Civil War was all but over
With the Imperial command ship destroyed, New Republic forces were able to outflank the Imperial forces on all fronts. With the battle turning against the Empire, the surviving Imperial forces began pulling ships onto the planet's surface utilizing their tractor beams, killing most of the occupants in an instant. While skirmishes continued on Jakku for several more months after the ''Ravager'' fell, the war was all but over in all meaningful ways; final spasms of a beheaded monster.

The surface of Jakku would remain littered with wreckage from the battle for decades to come as wrecked Imperial ships and vehicles on Jakku were plundered by local scavengers for spare parts and equipment. Decades later, contradicting stories continued to fly around Jakku's settlements about what exactly took place in the battle. A mysterious faction known as the dead-enders hung around Carbon Ridge, rumored to be protecting a secret Imperial research base.''Rey's Survival Guide''

=====Starting the game over=====

thumb|left|300px|Yape Tashu, Gallius Rax, Brendol Hux, and his son Armitage, retreated to the Jakku Observatory
As the Empire lost the Battle of Jakku, Rax traveled to the Jakku Observatory along with Commandant Hux, Armitage Hux, the Imperial Adviser Yupe Tashu, and the child soldiers. While the Huxes and the soldiers waited aboard a replica of the Emperor's yacht ''Imperialis'', Rax and Tashu entered the Observatory to activate the mining bore that would destabilize the planet's core. Rax planned to detonate Jakku's core, destroying the Imperial forces and the New Republic fleet before escaping to the Unknown Regions, taking the Huxes and the child soldiers with him to build a new Empire. As part of the ceremony, Rax threw the unwitting Tashu, who was carrying several Sith artifacts, to his death down the borehole, initiating the self-destruct mechanism.

thumb|right|300px|With his final words, Rax told Sloane to carry out the final stage of the Contingency
Rax's plan was ultimately foiled by Sloane, Brentin, and Norra. Following a fight, Sloane killed Rax, then sealed the borehole shaft, stopping the planet's core from destabilizing further. This effectively sabotaged Palpatine's Contingency plan to destroy the remnants of his Empire. Heeding Rax's last words, Sloane assumed responsibility for carrying out the final stage of the Contingency. She accompanied the Huxes and the child soldiers into the Unknown Regions. After several months of travel, they rendezvoused with the Super Star Destroyer ''Eclipse'', formerly the Emperor's personal Star Destroyer, which had been sent in advance after the Observatory's computers had plotted a safe route through the Unknown Regions.

====End of an Empire====

With the death of Rax, the disappearance of Sloane, and the failure of the Imperial counteroffensive which ended with the loyalists' catastrophic defeat in the Battle of Jakku, the Empire forever changed as it was pushed back to a handful of sectors on the fringe of the Outer Rim, containing only a small fraction of the galaxy's population and industrial base. These sectors were a heavily fortified final redoubt, and the New Republic deemed that they posed too minor a threat to justify the high cost in life that liberating them would require.

thumb|left|300px|Mas Amedda agreed to the Galactic Concordance, a treaty which outlined the surrender of the Galactic Empire and the dissolution of the Imperial government
Not long after the battle, Grand Vizier Mas Amedda emerged from hiding, who, left with the highest position of power within the Empire after the Battle of Jakku, offered to surrender the Galactic Empire. This surrender would eventually come in the form of the Galactic Concordance, which, after going through a lengthy process of modification, agreement, and ratification, would eventually be signed by Mas Amedda on Chandrila, formally ending the Galactic Civil War. The humiliating concordance imposed strict disarmament plans and punishing reparations on the Empire, including stipulations outlining the banning of recruitment and mobilization of the Stormtrooper Corps, the banning of torture, the forced abandonment of the numerous Imperial Academies scattered across the Empire, the adherence strict disarmament treaties, the ceding of the Imperial throneworld of Coruscant to the New Republic, and the payment heavy war reparations. The concordance additionally established a formal successor state to the Galactic Empire within predetermined boundaries in the Core Worlds, Colonies, and the Inner Rim, made up of the remains of the Imperial Navy.

Soon after, all noncombatant functionaries who served in the Empire were given conditional pardons by the New Republic provided they acted by the articles of the Galactic Concordance. Meanwhile, Imperial officials who refused to surrender to the New Republic were branded as war criminals, with some being believed to have been executed as a result. While some former Imperial governors were invited to the New Republic, those that accepted the offer bore the weight of crushing reparations, making the decision unattractive to many remaining Imperials. As such, factionalism fell over the fallen Empire''Lost Stars'' as many Imperial Warlords rejected the terms offered by the New Republic, instead fleeing with their remnants to establish footholds on distant worlds where the New Republic would not interfere,''Star Wars: The Mandalorian'': Guide to Season One clinging to what little power they had left.

===Legacy===
====Strangers in a familiar land====

=====Official successor state=====

thumb|right|300px|The forces of the new Imperial remnant adhered to the terms of the Concordance and confined itself to the predetermined boundaries.
As outlined in the Galactic Concordance, a new future for the Empire was granted to remaining Imperial forces within a predetermined territory of the galaxy that included parts of the Core Worlds, Colonies, and the Inner Rim, containing many ancient and conservative worlds that had supported Palpatine including Commenor, Humbarine, Tinnel, Rendili, and Denon. As such, at the command of the New Republic, all Imperial forces and remnants that complied with the provisions of the concordance retreated within the new boundaries.

However, the leadership of the Inner systems' Imperial remnant, made up of the various fragmented successors to the Empire, quickly devolved into petty squabbles on all matters from relations with the New Republic to which Imperial legacies deserved preservation, which combined with the regulation and dismemberment of the once-mighty Imperial military-industrial complex, resulted in struggle to turn the faction into a viable state. As a result, the Inner systems' Imperial remnant disintegrated soon after its founding, leading to several of its key worlds joining the New Republic instead, the representatives and leaders of which went on to become leaders of the Centrists, a political party which advocated and pushed for a stronger central government and military.

=====A new demesne=====

thumb|left|300px|Rae Sloane, Brendol Hux, Armitage Hux, and a group of orphans travelled the unknown regions aboard the ''Imperialis''
Having heeded Gallius Rax's final words, Grand Admiral Rae Sloane travelled across the Unknown Regions aboard the ''Imperialis'' alongside Brendol Hux, his son Armitage, and a group of orphans to rendezvous with the Executor-class Star Dreadnought ''Eclipse'' at a series of safe coordinates stored inside a dataspike given to her. During the journey that took several months and involved several hyperspace jumps through a maze of black holes and superstorms, Sloane feared that the orphans, given that they took orders only from Armitage, would attack her in her sleep. As such, she struck an accord with Armitage by promising to protect the younger Hux from his father if Hux told the orphans to leave her alone.

Afterwards, Sloane confronted Brendol Hux about her killing of Rax, revealing the counselor's bloody cape. In response, Brendol attempted to attack her, but Sloane beat him into submission and forced him to agree to obey her orders and to stop harming his son, additionally ordering that the officer to teach Armitage everything he knew about the Empire, to which Hux agreed to by nodding his head. For the remainder of the trip, Sloane kept away from the children and bid her time studying its history, its flight time, its communication, and weapons, eventually discovering that the ''Imperialis'' had transmitted a set of path coordinates to a dozen different sources. Consulting the ship's sentinel droid, Sloane discovered that the path coordinates had been transmitted to other Imperials deemed loyal. During her solitude, Sloane also resolved that she would build a new Empire that was not given to the backstabbing and incest of Palpatine's former Empire which Rax had destroyed. Additionally, she also found that the blaster wound in her abdomen had not fully healed.

thumb|right|300px|The Executor-class Star Dreadnought (pictured) ''Eclipse'' was parked at the edge of a geomagnetic storm
Eventually, the group arrived to and rendezvoused with the  ''Eclipse'', the former personal flagship of the Emperor, which had been sent ahead by Rax and was parked at the edge of a geomagnetic storm. As the ''Imperialis'' made it's final approach to the dreadnought Super Star Destroyer, Sloane stated that their first order was start again, and to get it right that time around. In response, Hux agreed before announcing that glory was in order for the Grand Admiral, to which Sloane rejected, responding that glory was only to the Empire.

thumb|left|300px|Sloane established a new regime that sought to restore the Empire while avoiding the original's mistakes
Eventually, the ''Eclipse'' rendezvoused with the forces that had jumped to the Unknown Regions from the Battle of Jakku, a group that included''Star Wars: The Rise of Skywalker: The Visual Dictionary'' the self-appointed high colonel Enric Pryde.''Shadow of the Sith'' With this group, Sloane formed a new regime and continued the Imperial ideology forward while striving to avoid the same mistakes as the Empire, setting the remnant on a path toward Neo-Imperialism. Over years of hardship, the remnant traveled and tamed the wilderness of the Unknown Regions and barely mapped star systems using hyperspace routes charted by the Attendants and once learned from the knowledge of Grand Admiral Thrawn''Thrawn Ascendancy: Chaos Rising'' during the Imperial Era, eventually finding a footing on planets that had previously been secretly charted by the Empire. During this time hidden in the dangerous at sparsely populated unknown regions, the Empire bolstered its forces with secret Imperial reinforcements that had been previously seeded there by the Emperor''Star Wars: The Last Jedi: Expanded Edition'' and began plotting their return to power.

=====Randd's remnant=====
thumb|right|250px|Imperial forces under the command of Grand Moff Randd regrouped in the Queluhan Nebula
Around the same time, the remaining Imperial forces under the command of Grand Moff Randd fled the Battle of Jakku and retreated to the Queluhan Nebula, where ionized gases ensured New Republic's sensors could not detect their force. There, the Imperial remnant amassed prepared a large fleet, crewed largely by new recruits, for a new offensive against the New Republic. During the buildup, Commander Nash Windrider was posted to the attack cruiser ''Garrote'', where he ensured "proper discipline" to the crew he commanded to the point that they dared not turned away from their work, even when he left the command bridge. Despite learning of the survival of Thane Kyrell, Windrider did not reveal the information to Dalven Kyrell, who was serving as an assistant to the flight commander. Believing that captain Ciena Ree had perished aboard the Star Destroyer ''Inflictor'' at Jakku, Windrider nominated for the Distinguished Medal of Imperial Honor.

Upon learning of the nomination, Kyrell suggested the more common Medal of Honor would be more appropriate, though Windrider pointed out that she had stayed aboard the ship to crash it into the surface and deny the ''Inflictor'' to the New Republic. Dalven suggested that Windrider's nomination could be seen as a sign of factionalism since they had belonged in the same class, though Windrider retorted that several prominent Imperial captains, generals, and admirals, including Randd himself, were also planning to nominate Ree because she had died a hero's death. Chastised by his commander, Dalven remarked that Ciena had died a "terrible death," though Windrider and suggested that it was a glorious way to die for the Empire. Knowing that Dalven had ridiculed Ciena in his adolescence, Windrider considered sending the clerical officer on an "appropriate" suicide mission, though Windrider's disdain for Dalven was not matched by his hatred for the traitor to the Empire Thane. Later, as the fleet prepared for a strike against the New Republic, Windrider vowed to avenge Ciena's purported death.

=====A magistrate's vision=====

thumb|left|300px|Magistrate Morgan Elsbeth's forces kept people under her rule ignorant of the Empire's collapse
Following the rise of the New Republic, Magistrate Morgan Elsbeth kept the people under her Empire-aligned industrial regime ignorant of the Empire's collapse and continued to work them. Rarely leaving the walls of her palace on Corvus during this time, Morgan left her army of scout guards and HK-87 assassin droids to torture any dissenting villagers in shock cages outside her capital city of Calodan's walls. Meanwhile, Elsbeth received a vision and calls from the Nightsister Great Mothers, who had allied Grand Admiral Thrawn''Star Wars Encyclopedia: The Comprehensive Guide to the Star Wars Galaxy'' after the admiral was exiled to the Far galaxy by Ezra Bridger during the Liberation of Lothal. Eager to restore the Galactic Empire and believing she had a chance to bring back her culture, Elsbeth started plotting to bring about Thrawn's return.

thumb|right|300px|Magistrate Morgan Elsbeth (pictured) began preparations to bring about the return of Thrawn, who was exiled in the far Galaxy
To begin her mission to rescue Thrawn, Elsbeth arranged for Facility 301G, one of her former shipyard on Corellia, to begin construction on parts for the Eye of Sion, a large hyperspace transport ring that could fit an ''Imperial I''-class Star Destroyer Despite the facility supposedly becoming a salvage yard for Imperial vessels to repurpose parts for New Republic Defense Fleet vessels, in reality, the staff, many of whom were Imperial loyalists, stayed the same, while the Regional Supervisor Myn Weaver themself was also an Imperial loyalist. As construction progressed, Elsbeth enlisted the help of the Dark Jedi Baylan Skoll and Shin Hati as well as the Imperial inquisitor Marrok to bolster her forces.

thumb|left|300px|Magistrate Morgan Elsbeth refused to surrender her regime to the New Republic
Around this time, New Republic soldiers, alongside Nadura, an ambassador for the Republic and a former resident of the planet, visited the Calodan in an attempt to bring Elsbeth to trial and have Corvus become a member of the Republic. Upon her arrival, Nadura demanded a meeting with Elsbeth, asking her to follow her peacefully rather than resort to a fight. Instead, Elsbeth coldly ordered her guards to slaughter Nadura and her escort, of which she personally killing two members of. Having rigged Nadura's ship to explode, as the ambassador reached her ship to send a distress signal to the New Republic, Elsbeth had her guards blow up the ship, killing all remaining new Republic members. Following this, Elsbeth had her guards set fire to the forests surrounding Calodan, burning most of Corvus' forests.

=====Neo-Imperialist holdouts=====

thumb|right|300px|Several remnants continued to occupy the planet Morak
On the largely unknown planet of Morak in Wild Space, &mdash; Based on corresponding data for the Morak system which fell outside the jurisdiction of the New Republic, several Imperial forces continued to occupy the planet and began a secret mining operation for rhydonium, which after being mined, was brought to a refinery by HCVw A9.2 juggernaut transport. The refinery was run by ex-Imperial Security Bureau members and defended a platoon consisting of stormtroopers, shoretroopers, technicians, and cargo transport pilots. By 9 ABY, the refinery served as a base of operations for the Imperial general Valin Hess while juggernaut transports began to be raided by a group of native Shydopp pirates.

thumb|left|300px|Moff Gideon lead a sizable Imperial remnant following the Empire's collapse
Meanwhile, the ex-ISB Moff Gideon faked his execution for war crimes and fled into the Outer Rim Territories with his position of prestige and authority intact. There, the Moff was able to unite with other Imperial loyalists and form a sizable Imperial remnant, for which he established a base of operations for on Mandalore. The remnant would also come to control an Imperial facility on Nevarro built during the Imperial expansion, from which Imperial scientist doctor Penn Pershing worked on cloning experiments for the Gideon's remnant, the results of which Gideon hoped to combine with the Dark Trooper project to create a perfect army of super soldiers to bring order to the galaxy. The remnant would also take over a building in the planet's capital city Nevarro City, which became an Imperial safe house under the command of a loyal and nostalgic Imperial officer. In addition, Gideon's remnant began acquiring illegal weapons at a black market port on Trask with the plunders of the Great Purge of Mandalore, causing Bo-Katan Kryze to begin attacking and stealing the transports to form a force to retake Mandalore.

thumb|right|300px|The Shadow Council was reformed to coordinate activity between neo-Imperial forces
By 9 ABY, Moff Gideon, along with other surviving Imperial warlords who sought to restore the Empire, including Captain Gilad Pellaeon and his delegation, Commandant Brendol Hux, Commander Janu, a warlord who thought there were citizens still loyal to the Empire across the galaxy, and a warlord who thought such citizens would rally behind them if the Imperial remnants used a show of strength, formed a new Shadow Council under the theoretical leadership of Grand Admiral Thrawn, who Pellaeon though would soon return to the galaxy from exile as Heir to the Empire. The new Shadow Council coordinated their forces, exchanging them when needed, while making themselves appear as unorganized remnants to conceal their strength. Yet, to many in the galaxy, the survival of Imperial remnants did not alter the reality of the era they lived in; as for many, the Empire was gone.

====Republic after the Empire====

=====Truth and Reconciliation=====

In the waning says of the Empire, many Imperial who had worked for Commission for the Preservation of the New Order and the Imperial Security Bureau erased their own identities within Imperial Archives and simply left, never to return. As a result, in the wake of the Imperial regime's collapse, planetary populations began discovering the true remains of the Imperial regime; secret interrogation and torture facilities, execution chambers, death camps, concentration camps, and hidden offices for Imperial Intelligence that contained huge amounts surveillance records. Upon their discovery, riots nearly broke out on these worlds as huge swaths of citizens attempted to storm these facilities to either find the fate of their closest family and friends or to destroy records of family being Imperial informants. The New Republic quickly realized the importance of the documents for holding Imperial commanders and leaders on trial, though were left at a loss on how to protect the documents, not wanting to use lethal force on both trespassers nor prisoners in concentration camps who trying to burn them to the ground. Making things more difficult, not all worlds where the facilities were located had joined the New Republic, making the topic of jurisdiction, in this case between the demands of justice and history versus the claims of innocent civilians to know what information the previous government held about them and their right to privacy, became a contentious issue.

thumb|left|300px|The New Republic discovered the brutal prison conditions on Wobani
During the first briefing of the governing council New Republic governing council regarding the intelligence gathered from Wobani, Agent Joris Vegen, one of the first New Republic personnel to arrive on the planet and who was in charge of the evidence's presentation, was so upset by the horrifying images that she presented that she broke down in tears twice. Three senators were also similarly stricken, leading to delay of 27 minutes in later records. When news reached Leia Organa of the suffering and the need for aid quickly became apparent, she gathered a group of Alderaanian refugees lead by Commander Rutowan Cannter who paid for and personally delivered heavy freighters full of bacta and foodstuffs within three days, though it was not enough for the amount of people suffering. Despite this, a prison on Wobani would later be used by the New Republic as a prison. On Ivera X, surviving civilians looted the planet's Imperial headquarters and rather than giving it to themselves, used the wealth to hire the bounty hunter Xegan Miatt to locate the senior Imperial officials who ordered the destruction of their cities and bring them back to them for justice. Miatt quickly captured two Imperial majors and a lieutenant governor, all of whom were promptly executed by the Iverians. However, the New Republic soon stepped in, stopping the killings from continuing.

Left with many former members of the Imperial regime split across various prisons, prisoner of war camps, and other facilities, the New Republic began the enormous task of identifying every Imperial they had in their custody. Many of there prisoners had not given their real identities to the Republic, many as a result of being captured with their command cylinders and seeing no reason to, but also because there were some prisoners that were wanted for high crimes against the galaxy. To identify the prisoners, the New Republic began a large interrogation and questioning program through New Republic Intelligence agents and specially programmed droids to both identify the prisoners and gather information on the crimes they committed. To facilitate this, a system of evaluation based upon each individual’s perceived value and risk was applied in various combinations, with those identified as being high value&mdash; Imperial officers and leaders or those who possessed important information&mdash; not only were kept in secure locations to prevent escape or suicide attempts, but were also the first to be interrogated. In one such interrogation, when Imperial Vice Admiral Corf Ferno was asked why he had advised Moff Pollus Maksim to surrender, he claimed he had fought enough wars to know when they were lost, and he simply wanted to go home. However, the memoir he later wrote, ''Fighting with the Galactic Empire'', would contradict some of the testimony he provided to the New Republic. In the end, numerous ex-Imperials were tried for war crimes and genocide.

thumb|right|300px|The New Republic Amnesty Program provided a path for ex-Imperials to be rehabilitated
Meanwhile, those registered further down the rankings were kept for a long time, during which issues arose within the New Republic regarding what to do once they were processed and potentially freed. Eventually, the New Republic decided on a process of de-Imperialization was instituted, in which former Imperials registered as low value and low risk were moved through processing quickly to enable them to take up the jobs they’d previously held in the Empire under the New Republic government. However, other ex-Imperials that had committed minor crimes took longer to processed over the course of several years, as the New Republic took time to look through the Hall of Imperial Records on Coruscant. Those adjudged to have committed lesser offenses were eventually released, with certain restrictions relating to voting rights and weapon ownership, under the New Republic Amnesty Program.

In the Amnesty program, counseling was provided to former Imperials that was performed by droids, and accommodation was provided within the Re-Integration Institute on Coruscant. However, the program both utilized, albeit on lower voltages, the Mind Flayer, a torture machine formerly used by Imperial interrogators, under the rational that the machines would be used to help ease or remove painful memories and emotions. Additionally, the program not only isolated members to a group made up of other Amnesty members, but also stripped members of a name, instead simply identified members by a numbered designation much in the same way the Galactic Empire had. Despite these conditions, the program still went ahead, with an individual that once served in the Galactic Empire as a facilities planning officer serving in the New Republic Amnesty Program, during which time he helped rebuild Plazir-15 and eventually became the its government's leader with the name of "Bombardier." Despite many around the galaxy refusing to accept that these ex-Imperials could ever be rehabilitated to any acceptable level, the New Republic persisted with the program.

=====Propping up the New Republic=====

thumb|left|200px|The New Republic worked to pass legislation overhauling the old Imperial legal framework
As the New Republic began to get a grip of the situation, the newly formed New Republic Senate got to work passing emergency legislation to overhaul the old Imperial legal framework, giving the Republic a license to govern. However, the New Republic quickly faced the issue of fairly and justly implementing and applying these new laws and rules. Unlike the Empire, which had selectively chosen when to bring down punishment, the New Republic sought to show the citizens of the galaxy what justice and the law consistently and fairly applied looked like, which would show they no longer needed to be afraid as transgressions of the law would be treated the same in every instance.

At the same time, the New Republic began quickly removing and publicly destroying symbols of the Empire to banish the specter of the fallen regime. During this time, one of the most contentious and hotly debated topics was making the capital of the New Republic Coruscant. Those in favor of the move pointed out that the planet had been the capital of the Galactic Republic before becoming the Imperial throneworld, and that bureaucratic systems of still existing on the planet made it invaluable. Meanwhile, opponents to the movement argued that it was a bad idea move the capital to Coruscant so soon after the Empire, as moving their capital to the Imperial throneworld could be seen as becoming a new empire. Ultimately, a rotating capital system was eventually established, during which time Coruscant would serve as capital in 9 ABY.As established here, the events of ''Star Wars: The Mandalorian'' occur in 9 ABY. Within "Chapter 12: The Siege," Chandrila is mentioned to be the capital of the New Republic. However, Making History: Five Years of ''The Mandalorian'' establishes that, as of the later episode "Chapter 19: The Convert," Coruscant had taken over as the capital. As both episodes take place in 9 ABY, the switch in capitals must have occurred in that year. During this time, Mas Amedda cut multiple highly advantageous deals with the New Republic that not only out of prison, but also living in style.

=====Crumbling pillars of the Empire=====

thumb|right|300px|The Military Disarmament Act combined with the galaxy-wide recession limited the size of the New Republic Defense Force as the threat of the Imperial remnants grew
As the New Republic was left with the reigns to lead the galaxy, the pillars of the Imperial state that had once been viewed as secure crumbled, its ramifications became apparent as infrastructure broke and halted on various worlds with nobody to facilitate it, and nobody to pay workers. The knock on effects became clear as job guarantees vanished, food shipments stopped, transport services froze, sanitation repairs ended. The galactic economy quickly shrunk into recession as the New Republic began needing money more than ever to provide aid, medical supplies, and foodstuff at a time when there was scarcely enough to go around. Knock on effects quickly occurred as New Republic soldiers and pilots, many of whom had served in the Rebel Alliance during the Galactic Civil War, were forced out of service due to a lack of enough pay, forcing them to return home traumatized and scarred, sometimes to worlds and families who had rejected them for fighting the Empire. Alongside the Military Disarmament Act, an act forced through the New Republic senate around the end of the Galactic Civil War''Aftermath'' that limited the size of the New Republic Defense Force in favor of planetary defense forces to avoid repeating the mistakes of the Galactic Republic, the New Republic Defense Force was left spread thin as the threat of the Imperial remnants began to grow on the fringes of the galaxy.

In the Core Worlds, the situation was better, as most Star systems in the region had not been occupied or devastated to the same extend systems and worlds in other regions had. The Core Worlds also retained enough of the bureaucratic infrastructure from the Empire, though these worlds, all of whom had held much more significant power in the Empire, were forced out of such positions as a result of their service to the Imperial regime. As a result, suspicion weighed heavily on many planets, with worlds that had cooperated with the Imperial regime seen as being complicit with its worst crime, while worlds that had long been occupied by Imperial forces and as such did not know any other way of life were viewed as desiring the return of the Empire.

====Imperial resurgence====

=====Stirrup on Nevarro=====
======Commissioning bounty hunters======

In 9 BBY, Moff Gideon came to require a Force-sensitive being for a series of experiments involving blood transfusions overseen by Doctor Penn Pershing, using the remains of the Imperial Army he controlled to attempt to acquire it. However,  the asset had been captured by a Nikto encampment on the planet Arvala-7, and as a result, an Nevarro City-based officer of Gideon's Imperial remnant, in possession the coordinates of the Child's last known location and tracking fobs that tracked the asset when close to it, the officer set up a high paying but off-the record job for bounty hunters to retrieve the asset, where rather than using traditional holopuck and chain code, the client only met the hunters who accepted the job face to face''The Mandalorian'' Junior Novel  at his safe house in order to not give any more information than Grogu's age and tracking signature. To get hunters for the job, the client informed Greef Karga, the Bounty Hunters' Guild's agent on Nevarro, of the job, and provided him with chits to give to bounty hunters to allow them into his safe house.

As many bounty hunters from the Nevarro division of the Guild took up the Imperial job, none were successful in acquiring the asset. Yet as the bounty was live, Karga informed the the Client that Mandalorian Bounty hunter Din Djarin was coming to meet him about the bounty, describing the hunter as both the best in the parsec but also as expensive. As a result, the client waited at his desk in the safe house, guarded by four armed stormtroopers, in anticipation of Djarin's arrival, preparing a slab of beskar for the hunter as down payment. Soon after, Djarin arrived at the safe house, and presented the chit he was given to a TT-8L/Y7 gatekeeper droid, which, after verifying the chit, opened the door for the bounty hunter, where a GNK-series power droid then guided the bounty hunter to the client.

thumb|right|300px|"The Client" defused a standoff between his stormtroopers and Din Djarin.
Upon Din arriving in the main room, a squad of stormtroopers turned their heads to face the mandalorian, before the Client greeted the bounty hunter. However, Doctor Pershing then quickly entered the room, startling Din into immediately drawing his weapons and prompting the stormtroopers protecting the Client to do the same on the bounty hunter and tell him to drop his weapons and freeze. As a result, Pershing stuttered for a moment before apologizing, causing the Client to stand up and introduce Pershing, asking the mandalorian to excuse the enthusiastic but non-discrete scientist's lack of decorum before asking that Djarin lower his guns. However, the bounty hunter demanded that the stormtroopers lower theirs first, causing one to respond that they had Djarin outnumbered four to one, to which the bounty hunter stated were odds he liked. Stepping in, the Client stated to Darjin that Karga had said that he was expensive, inviting the bounty hunter to sit before signaling to the troopers to do the same.

Once Djarin sat, the Client presented the mandalorian with an ingot of beskar cast in an Imperial furnace, clarifying that it was real as the squad of stormtroopers looked on. The Client then stated that the ingot was a down payment, before explaining that he had a camtono of beskar upon the mandalorian's delivery of the asset, before Pershing then added that the asset had to be alive, which the Client agreed with. However, the Client then acknowledged that he understood bounty hunting was a complicated profession, and as such would accept proof of termination for a lower fee. Pershing the stated to the Client that such payment for proof of termination was not what they had agreed upon, to which the Client stated he was simply being pragmatic. Djarin then asked for the puck, however the Client responded that the secrecy of the bounty dictated a less traditional arrangement, stating he could only give a tracking fob, which Pershing promptly gave to the bounty hunter. When Djarin asked for the chain code, the Client stated he could only give the last four digits, the age of the asset, which the Client then explained was fifty years. Following this, The Client then offered Djarin the last recorded positional data, which he believed alongside the fob, would allow a hunter such as Djarin would make quick work of the bounty. As Djarin stood up and began to leave, the Client stated to the hunter that the beskar belonged back in the hands of the mandalorian as he believed it was good to restore the natural order of things, asking Din if he agreed. However, the hunter did not respond and only turned his head momentarily before leaving the safe house.

======To the winner go the spoils======

thumb|left|300px|the Client confirmed Djarin's capture of the asset
Eventually, Djarin tracked down the asset and informed Greef Karga of the asset's capture. Karga in turn told the Client, who became antsy and excited upon learning of Djarin's capture of the asset. Karga soon sent a response message, in which he informed Djarin to deliver the asset directly to the client, and speculated if the Cient was going to eat the asset or hang it on his wall as he was very antsy. As such, upon Djarin's return to Nevarro, the bounty hunter returned to the remnant safe house directly. Upon the hunter knocking on the door, a gatekeeper droid once again popped out, which Djarin once again present his chit to, and had his identity verified. Once this was complete, two stormtroopers made their way to the door and silently greeted the hunter and confirmed the asset was with him, before the group entered the safe house. As the group made their way to the main room, one of the stormtroopers grabbed the asset's hover pram, prompting Djarin to tell the stormtrooper to take it easy, to which the stormtrooper responded that the hunter should take it easy. Once the group entered the main room, the Client rose from his seat and approached the Child's hovering pram, using the fob to confirm that he was indeed "the asset." Doctor Pershing, who was also present in the main room, then scanned Grogu and confirmed that he was in good health and fit for experiments.''Star Wars: Character Encyclopedia, Updated and Expanded Edition''

thumb|right|300px|"The Client" gave Din Djarin his camtono of beskar as payment for the delivery of the asset
Following this, the Client told the Djarin that his reputation was not unwarranted, though the bounty hunter ignored the comment and asked the Client how many fobs he had given out. In response to the hunter's question, the Client explained that the reason was the asset was of extreme importance to him, and as such he had to ensure delivery, before continuing that to only the winner would receive the bounty, revealing his camtono of beskar to Djarin. As the bounty hunter picked up a ingot of beskar, the Client continued that the bounty was quite large for the delivery of such a small asset. However, as Pershing brought the asset into another room for study, Djarin asked what the Empire's plans for the asset were. In response the Client stated to Djarin that it was uncharacteristic of a bounty hunter with his reputation to ask such a question, especially after receiving both commission and payment, before reminding the hunter in question form that the Bounty Hunter Code dictated the events that just transpired were to be forgotten. Continuing, the Client told Djarin that the beskar was enough to make a nice replacement for his damaged armor, adding that in the current era it was becoming harder to find a mandalorian than finding beskar.

Following the conversation, Djarin left the Imperial safe house and returned to the Nevarro City's secret Mandalorian covert, where he had The Armorer create a new chestplate for him in her workshop. Before the new armor's creation began however, another Mandalorian in the covert, Paz Vizsla, noticed the ingots, and confronted Djarin alongside several other Mandalorians, taking an ingot of beskar and identifying it as being cast in an Imperial smelter, telling the others around him that the beskar were the spoils of the Great Purge, after the Armorer briefly responded, Visla reminded the room that Mandalore was shattered by the Empire, yet Djarin was sharing tables with them. After a short fight broke out between Visla and Djarin, the armorer broke up the fight, reminding the pair and the group that the Empire was no longer. A the same time, Greef Karga also received multiple ingots of beskar from the Imperials, which he shared with Djarin during a later conversation. during the same conversation, Djarin asked Karga what he thought the clients would do with it, thought Karga stated he had not asked due to the Guild Code. However, Djarin pressed the question, pointing out the clients were Imperials, to which Karga stated the Empire was gone, and all that was left were mercenaries and warlords.

thumb|left|300px|Stormtroopers conducted a perimeter sweep of the remnant safe house
Unsatisfied however, Djarin returned to the Imperial safe house to free the Child he had brought to the Imperials. As Djarin neared the safe house, the Client ordered Pershing to extract the necessary material and get rid of the asset. However, Pershing protested the order as Moff Gideon had ordered them to keep the asset alive, to which the Client told Pershing to finish the work quickly as he could no longer guarantee the Doctor's safety. Unbeknownst to both Imperials however, Djarin was spying on their conversation. Djarin would then begin his rescue by knocking on the door of the safe house, making the gatekeeper droid reveal itself. However, Djarin ripped the droid's head off, causing two stormtroopers to leave the safe house and investigate, with one then ordering a perimeter sweep after spotting the destroyed droid. As they did so, Djarin set off a bomb, which the stormtroopers proceeded to investigate. However, as the stormtroopers neared the blast site, they were caught off guard by Djarin, who promptly defeated them and entered the safe house.

thumb|right|300px|Pershing was spared by Din Djarin
As the Djarin entered, a stormtrooper on the inside hallway shot at Djarin, only for the blaster bolt to be deflected. Djarin then shot and killed the stormtrooper, before proceeding further inside the base. There, he faced Doctor Pershing, who begged for the hunter not to hurt the child. Djarin shot a nearby IT-O interrogation droid, before putting a blaster up to Pershing's head and asking what he did to it. In response, Pershing responded that he was protecting the Child and it would already be dead if he was not, before once again begging for his life. Pershing continued to beg for his life for a moment before looking up to find both Djarin and the Child gone.

thumb|left|300px|Stormtroopers attempted to stop Djarin from escaping with the Child
Meanwhile, a stormtrooper spotted Djarin and informed their comrade who stood next to them, before the pair then opened fire on the bounty hunter before Djarin the shot the lights out and hid. As a result, the stormtrooper squad then searched the room for the mandalorian, with one trooper ordering that they split up to flush the hunter out, which another stromtrooper confirmed. A stormtrooper then attempted to tell the hunter to give up as there was nowhere to run, but was shot by Djarin before the hunter defeated the rest of the squad. As Djarin attempted to leave the safe house's though the main room, another squad of stormtroopers then surrounded the hunter, with the stormtroopers ordering the hunter to freeze and drop his weapons. Djarin would then put the child down and released Whistling birds, killing all four stormtroopers, before escaping with the asset. Local bounty hunters then attempted to stop Djarin from escaping with the bounty, but would ultimately fail when the Manadalorian covert revealed themselves to protect Djarin.

======Imperial occupation of Nevarro City======

Following his escape, Djarin travelled the Galaxy while successfully protecting the Child from number of bounty hunters who attempted recapture the Child. During this time, Djarin met the ex-Republic Shock trooper Carasynthia Dune on Sorgan, who explained to the hunter how she had once fought against Imperial warlords. Not long after, Djarin met the former Imperial sharpshooter Migs Mayfeld, which Djarin suggested meant Mayfeld's aim was bad. In response Mayfeld told explained that he had not served as a stormtrooper. On Nevarro meanwhile, Gideon's Imperial remnant responded to the escape of the asset by occupying Nevarro City shortly after and retaliating on the hidden Mandalorian covert for their part in the asset's escape, killing many in The Tribe. The Armorer and Paz Visla however, survived the attack.

Eventually, Greef Karga sent a message to Djarin in which he informed the hunter of the Imperial occupation that had descended on Nevarro City before asking the hunter to aid him in killing the Client with the promise of a clean slate and the ability to leave with the Child. In addition, Karga requested that Djarin bring the Child should Djarin accept the mission, reasoning the Imperials would not stop until they acquired the asset while promising his guild members would ensure their protection. Secretly however, Karga planned to betray Djarin and return Grogu to the Empire. Planning to accept the offer from Karga, Djarin travelled to Sorgan to recruit Cara Dune and for the operation. While initially hesitant to join it due to her criminal record that could land her a life sentence, upon learning that the warlord they would be facing was Imperial, Cara agreed to join.

Following this, the group travelled to Arvala-7 to recruit the ugnaught Kuiil, who had helped Djarin originally track down the Child. As the group discussed the operation at Kuiil's moisture farm, Kuiil revealed he had previously served the Empire to Dune before adding that he had payed off his clan's debt and no longer served anyone but himself. After further private discussion with Djarin, Kuiil eventually agreed to aid in the operation to protect the Child from slavery, as he believed nobody would be truly free until the old ways were gone. As a result, they group, now also including the reprogramed droid IG-11, began to travel to Nevarro to partake in the operation. During their travel, Djarin and Dune engaged in a friendly arm wrestle, though upon doing so the Child used the force in an attempt to protect Djarin. In response to the incident, Kuiil noted that he had heard rumors of force users, prompting Cara to angrily ask Kuill if he had heard the rumors while he was working for the Empire. In response to Dune's comment, Kuill clarified he was sold into indentured servitude, prompting Dune to point out that Kuill was free before Kuill explained how he had bought his freedom through intense skill and labor, adding that Dune should not cast doubt on who he served. Later, shortly before approaching Nevarro, Dune and Djarin discussed Nevarro, with Dune explaining that Nevarro had stayed part of the Empire until the end of the Galactic Civil War. Djarin the explained that the warlord they were going to take out was once an Imperial officer and their station was hard to tell as they no longer wore a rank insignia plaque, before explaining how he had taken out the warehouse and that was the reason for the Imperial reinforcements in the city. Dune however felt there was more going on and told Djarin as much. Later in the conversation, Djarin reminded Dune that they only needed to take out the head Imperial, as the rest would then scatter like rats if the leader was taken out.

Upon landing the ''Razor Crest'' on Nevarro, Djarin and his detail met with a group of bounty hunters and Karga, who, upon seeing Cara Dune, recommended she stay with the ship as the town was run by Imperials and would get irritated at the sight of a shock trooper. Ultimately, Karga agreed to let Dune come if she covered her Shock trooper tatoo, which she did. That night, the group set up camp and sat around a fire, during which time Djarin and Karga once again discussed the plan. Karga explained that they would enter the cantina and show the Client the Child, before then joining the Client at a table where Djarin would then kill the Client. Djarin the requested clarification on the Client's reinforcements, to which Karga explained that as they were ex-empire, they would scatter the moment they lost their paychecks. Djarin then asked what would happen if they did not, to which Karga stated that the Imperials would. Still unsatisfied however, Djarin pushed Karga, prompting Karga explain that Dune and the Guild hunters could easily defeat any remaining troopers that remain. Not long after, Karga was attacked by a Nevarro reptavian, but was ultimately saved by the Child, prompting Karga to rethink his planned betrayal.

======Change of plans======

As the group neared Nevarro City the next day, Karga turned and shot his detail before revealing to Djarin and Dune of his orginally planned betrayal and his reasoning for turning. Karga then offered Djarin a choice; to shoot him and escape with the child knowing the Client is obsessed with the Child, or help him liberate the city. After some discussion, the group agreed to help liberate the city with Djarin pretending to be caught along with the Child's pram as bait, and Dune pretending to be the bounty hunter that caught him.

As a result, Kuill returned to the ''Razor Crest'' with the Child to keep them safe while Djarin, Dune, and Karga approached Nevarro City. Upon arriving at the city's entrance, Scout trooper AP-1982 requested Karga's chain code, to which Karga while explained that he had captured Djarin and was going to present him to the Client. However, AP-1982 once again requested Karga to present his chain code, to which Karga obliged. As AP-1982 scanned Karga's chain code, he offered Karga 20 credits for Djarin's helmet, to which Karga refused, stating it would go on his own wall. After the group was cleared to enter the city, the group continued to the cantina where the Client was while passing the occupying Stormtroopers. The large amount of stormtroopers in the city prompted Dune to point out to Karga that he had said there was only four stormtroopers, to which Karga explained he had meant there were only four stormtroopers guarding the Client.

thumb|right|300px|Djarin was presented to the Client as a prisoner
Eventually, the group arrived at the cantina, where after entering, quietly Karga pointed out how there were only four stormtroopers to Djarin before greeting the Client by presenting Djarin. Following this, the Client inspected Djarin and complimented the Mandalorian's armor by sharing his amazement at the beauty of beskar when forged by ancient artisans, before offering Karga a drink, which the magistrate accepted before the Client directing Djarin and Karga to sit at a table. After the group did so, the client posed Djarin with rhetorical question, asking why the mandalorians rejected Imperial rule as to his understanding, the Empire improved every system it touched in every measurable metric. Continuing, the Client then asked Djarin to compare Imperial rule to the current era, which he saw as nothing but death and chaos. Following his statements, the Client the requested to see the child, causing Karga to claim that the child was asleep. However, the Client remained undeterred, stating that everybody would be quiet before once again requesting Karga open the pram. Before Karga could respond however, the Client was contacted by Moff Gideon, forcing him to stop excuse himself to the group to take the call. As the Client began to make contact, more stormtroopers entered, causing Dune to point the fact out to Karga, who could no longer defend his statement.

thumb|left|300px|The Client and the other Imperial troops in the cantina were shot by stormtroopers outside the building
Upon making contact with the Client, Moff Gideon inquired if the group had brought the Child, to which the Client responded they had and that it was currently sleeping. However, Gideon simply stated that the Client should check again before a squad of death troopers that had assembled outside the cantina opened fire on the building, killing all Imperial forces inside and trapping Dune, Karga, and Djarin. Moments later, a K79-H20 Imperial Troop Transport arrived, deploying a battalion of stormtroopers to supplement the death troopers and further secure the area outside the cantina. In response to the situation, the group inside the building took cover, and Djarin attempted to contact Kuiil to find out if he'd made it to the ship yet. After the ugnaught shared that he had not, Djarin ordered Kuiil to get to the ship and leave Nevarro before revealing that he and his allies were pinned down. Unbeknownst to both however, Scout troopers AP-1982 and JS-1975 picked up on the communication, and promptly activated their speeder bikes and set out to recover the Child.

thumb|right|300px|Moff Gideon joined his troops outside the cantina
Meanwhile, Moff Gideon piloted his Outland TIE fighter into Nevarro City and landed behind the battalion surrounding the cantina, before leaving the starfighter's cockpit and making his way to the front. Once there, Gideon addressed the group inside the cantina, telling them that they had something that he wanted, they did not understand what they were truly in possession of, and that in a few moments the Child would be his. Indeed, shortly after those words were spoken by Gideon, AP-1982 and JS-1975 caught up to Kuiil and killed the ugnaught before then recovering the Child for the Empire.

======Two scout troopers standing by======

thumb|left|300px|AP-1982 and JS-1975 awaited clearance to enter Nevarro City
After recovering the Child, AP-1982 and JS-1975 made their way back toward Nevarro City. Upon reaching a checkpoint outside the city, JS-1975 used their comlink to inform an operator that they had arrived and were awaiting confirmation to proceed into the city. Following this, the operator cleared them to proceed, though they also advised the troopers to double check citing the fact that Gideon had already taken out a local Imperial squad. As a result, JS-1975 told the operator that they would be standing by before AP-1982 then asked JS-1975 if the operator had said the Gideon had killed his own men, to which JS-1975 stated that they were not sure, though they believed it was possible as they knew Gideon's forces liked to lay down the law when they first arrive in a town.

Following this, the Child, who was in a sack carried by JS-1975, began making noise, prompting the scout trooper to punch the child through the bag and tell them to shut up before AP-1982 then asked JS-1975 what the Child was, to which JS-1975 responded that they did not know but for all they cared, the moff could eat it and he would not ask questions. AP-1982 then asked if they could see the Child, to which JS-1975 pointed out that the operator had stated Gideon had killed his own men to make a point, before asking AP-1982 if they understood the point and causing the scout trooper to back down.

thumb|right|300px|AP-1982 attempted to shoot a piece of junk to bide time
Following their exchange with JS-1975, AP-1982 pulled out pulled out an EC-17 hold-out blaster and began attempting to shoot at a piece of trash, though they failed at landing a shot. JS-1975 then pulled out their EC-17 blaster and fired, though they too missed their shot. The two scout troopers then tried again, failing to land a shot once again and causing JS-1975 to briefly inspect their own blaster. After the two put their blasters down, AP-1982 asked JS-1975 if they should give the Child some water, prompting JS-1975 to point out to AP-1982 that they were just trying to look at the child. AP-1982 then pointed out to JS-1975 that they had seen it, to which JS-1975 responded they they had only barely seen it as they had quickly picked the child up off the ground before then stuffing it in their sack. AP-1982 pointed out that was more then they got to see it, to which JS-1975 stated that they would not take the child out of the bag until they delivered it to the moff, which once again got AP-1982 to back down.

Following this, AP-1982 turned to sit in a different position while JS-1975 stood up and commed the operator asking for an update, to which the operator said they were still waiting on confirmation as Gideon had killed an officer for interrupting him. In response, JS-1975 thanked the operator before then adding that they and AP-1982 were still standing by. Upon JS-1975 finishing, AP-1982 asked what the last time the Child move was, to which JS-1975 stated that it had only been a couple of minutes at most and the child was fine. AP-1982 claimed it had been more than a minute however, before suggesting that they should check on the child to make sure it was still alive as it had been hit quite hard. In response, JS-1975 pointed out that AP-1982 just wanted to see it, though AP-1982 continued to pressed onward, eventually causing JS-1975 to furiously cave and show AP-1982 the child, proving that the child was fine. While looking at the child, AP-1982 poked the child while they and JS-1975 speculated on the child being a pet. Upon looking up to continue their speculation however, AP-1982 had their finger bitten by the child, causing AP-1982 to punch the child while JS-1975 said it served them right.

thumb|left|300px|AP-1982 and JS-1975 were attacked and incapacitated by IG-11
Following this, IG-11 approached the checkpoint and ordered the scout troopers to stop, causing the two troopers to grab their pistols, aim them at the IG-series assassin droid, and demand that the droid identify themself. When IG-11 identified themself as the child's nurse droid and requested the child's return, AP-1982 stated that they thought the droid was a hunter as IG-series droids were usually hunters, to which JS-1975 pointed out that the droid was, by chance, a nurse, before apologizing to the droid and telling it that it had to leave as well as firing a warning shot. When IG-11 requested clarification if that meant their request was denied, JS-1975 repeated their request for the droid to leave. As soon as JS-1975 said such however, IG-11 grabbed their arm and twisted it, causing them to scream, before then tossing the scout trooper to the ground. AP-1982 then tried firing a warning shot, but their blaster was quickly knocked out of their hand by the IG-series droid before they were grabbed by the helmet and getting their head rammed into a speeder bike several times. IG-11 then hijacked JS-1975's 74-Z speeder bike and escaped towards Nevarro city with the Child.

======Astute panic======

thumb|right|300px|Imperial forces assembled an E-Web heavy repeating blaster outside the cantina
Meanwhile, Imperial stormtroopers began to assemble a newer variant of the E-Web heavy repeating blaster cannon, the E-HOB heavy repeating laser cannon,''Star Wars Encyclopedia: The Comprehensive Guide to the Star Wars Galaxy'' outside the cantina, which Cara Dune pointed out to Din Djarin, who had located a sewer vent in the cantina to escape. As a result, Dune attempted to open the sewer grate with blaster fire as the Imperial troops completed the heavy repeating blaster's assembly. However, as she finished firing, Dune failed to open the sewer grate before Moff Gideon, hearing the commotion inside, began to speak to the group, stating that the astute panic of the group suggested they were aware of the situation they were in, and that he wanted to avoid further violence and instead offer a moment of consideration.

Gideon then continued by introducing the E-Web to the group and revealed he knew all of the everybody in the cantina's names by connecting the E-Web to Night of a Thousand Tears, and event known to Djarin, and to the Shock trooper operations that Dune had participated in. Gideon then further identified Karga as a disgraced magistrate suggesting he should lay down his weapon and come outside. Following this, Karga asked Gideon what his proposal was, to which Gideon answered that his proposal was reasonable negotiations. However, after Karga asked for assurance, Gideon admitted that the mercenaries couldn't trust him and just as Karga had broke their earlier arrangement, he would gladly break any promise made and watch the former magistrate die, offering only the assurance that he would act in his self-interest. Following his statement, Gideon then informed the group in the cantina that they had until sundown to surrender, or else he would have the E-Web open fire.

Gideon then walked away from the cantina as the group inside discussed their next steps, with Karga suggesting they at least hear Gideon out. However, Dune did not share Karga's view, stating her belief that since she was a former rebel shock trooper, she would likely be uploaded to a Mind Flayer by the Imperials. Djarin the revealed that he was sure the Imperial officer was Gideon, despite Dune's belief otherwise due to Gideon's supposed execution, because the officer knew his name, something that was only recorded in the registers of Mandalore, and Gideon was a member of the Imperial Security Bureau on Mandalore during the purge. Dune then stated that the Moff's intelligence background explained how he knew their names, before Djarin then pointed out that the fact Gideon had stated he still needed them meant that the child had escaped safely.

thumb|left|300px|Imperial forces in Nevarro City where attacked by IG-11
Shortly after, IG-11 arrived to Nevarro City with the intent to fulfill their purpose to nurse and protect. Arriving on the speeder bike stolen from JS-1975, IG-11 gunned down the three Imperial troopers guarding the edge of the town with a blaster mounted to the speeder, before proceeding inside the town without slowing, during which time they gunned down three Imperial stormtroopers. As IG-11 neared a squad of stormtroopers, the troopers attempted to shoot the droid, though to little avail as one trooper barely dodged a blaster bolt from IG-11, another trooper was hit by the same bolt, and another stormtrooper was gunned down by IG-11 further down the road. As IG-11 passed two stormtroopers who had been talking with a jawa, they were too gunned down as the IG droid passed them. As IG-11 began to near the cantina, they gunned down two more Stormtroopers as part of Gideon's platoon began to fire on the droid, including two Death troopers. However, IG-11 did not slow down or shift course as the troopers failed to his their target, forcing the death troopers to jump out of the way to safety as IG-11 both gunned down another stormtrooper and abandoned their speeder midair, sending it flying towards part of the stormtrooper battalion, tumbling briefly before erupting in an explosion that killed several stormtroopers.''The Mandalorian'' 8

thumb|right|300px|Imperial forces fought Djarin as he left the cover of the cantina
Seizing the moment, Djarin and Karga made their way outside while Dune provided him with cover fire, killing several stormtroopers and fighting two death troopers in the process, as IG-11, having killed more stormtroopers, began to themself be hit by blaster bolts from stormtroopers. Noticing this, Djarin hijacked the E-Web previously set up and began unleashing its devastating and deadly firepower on the troopers while IG-11 recovered and continued fighting, until Gideon, who had been watching the chaotic scene unfold, shot the E-Web's ammunition container with his blaster pistol, causing an explosion that injured Djarin. Meanwhile, Dune, who had defeated several stormtroopers that had broken down the door to the cantina, rushed to save Djarin and rushed him back inside the cantina as IG-11 provided cover fire, killing more stormtroopers in the process.

thumb|left|300px|An Incinerator stormtrooper attempted to burn Djarin, Dune, and Karga out of the cantina
As they did so however, Gideon then ordered that the group in the cantina be burned out, getting an Incinerator stormtrooper to the scene who promptly began to use their Flamethrower on the cantina through the window. After doing so for a short period of time, the Incinerator stormtrooper then made their way to the cantina's entrance as Djarin told the group to escape, offering himself to hold back the troops long enough to escape and die a warrior's death. However as the incinerator stormtrooper arrived at the cantina entrance and activated their flamethrower on the group, the child utilized the force to block the flames heading towards the group, before then redirecting the flames back at the trooper, causing a mini explosion near the trooper that sent them flying and screaming before becoming incapacitated upon contact with the ground. Taking advantage of the opportunity, Djarin was healed and the group escaped into the sewers through a cut in the grate that IG-11 had made and made their way to the mandalorian covert.

======Last stand======
thumb|right|300px|Imperial stormtroopers surrounded and attempted to question the Armorer
As Imperial troops began to enter the sewers, the group on the run arrived at the covert, where Djarin learned of the massacre of the covert, with the Armorer, who was still at the base, explaining that Imperial troops were responsible. However, as Imperial troops began to near, Dune and the armorer shared that they needed to leave as the Imperials would overrun the sewers soon, causing the group to go on the move again towards the lava flats. Indeed, shortly afterward, Imperial stormtroopers overran the covert where they found the armorer, who had chosen to stay, kneeling at her furnace. The troopers pointed their blasters at the mandalorian's head, before one trooper asked where the group had went. Receiving no response, the trooper pushed twice more until the armorer attacked the stormtroopers with her forging equipment, eventually emerging victorious from the brawl after leaving four incapacitated on the group and once burning in the forge.

thumb|left|300px|IG-11 emerged from the sewer's mouth to blow up the Imperial platoon waiting there
Meanwhile, the Dune, Djarin, Karga, IG-11, and the Child reached a ferry towards the lava flats and rode it. As they did so, a platoon of stormtroopers flanked the exit, hiding just out of view from the tunnel's mouth. However, Djarin managed to discover the platoon's presence through a heatmap, and promptly informed the group, causing IG-11 to begin their Self-destruct mechanism set by their manufacturer to avoid capture and to protect the child, fulfilling their base function. Wading through the lava, IG-11 emerged from the tunnel's mouth ahead of the ferry, and with the blasters of stormtroopers aimed at them, exploded, clearing the mouth of the Imperial platoon and allowing the group on the ferry to safely emerge.

thumb|right|300px|While his forces were defeated, Moff Gideon survived his first encounter with Din Djarin
However, as the group disembarked, Moff Gideon began to strafe the group from his Outland TIE fighter while the group ineffectively attempted to shoot back with their blasters. However, Djarin then equipped and utilized a jetpack he had received from the armorer before shooting a cable from his wrist launcher once up in the air and inching closer to the TIE's cockpit by moving up the cable. As Djarin attempted to shoot open the cockpit's latch, Gideon swerved the starfighter to one side, sending Djarin crashing into one of the TIE fighter's wings. However, Djarin managed to plant an explosive on the ship, and jumped off before safely detonating the explosive, sending Gideon's TIE crashing into the lava flats below. Following this, Djarin returned to Dune and Karga, where he clarified if there were any more stormtroopers to be taken out, to which Dune stated that she believed they had cleared the town of the Empire. After further discussion, Djarin left Nevarro while Gideon was presumed to be dead. Meanwhile, as jawas attempted to scrap Gideon's Outland TIE, Gideon utilized the darksaber to cut open the cockpit and escape his presumed death, returning to leading his forces soon after.

=====Combating piracy=====

======Boarded======

Following the Clash on Nevarro, Din Djarin embarked on a search for other mandalorians and a Jedi to reunite the child with. In pursuit of the mission, Djarin visted Tatooine, where he met Cobb Vanth, who wore Boba Fett's armor. To recover the armor, Djarin defeated Krayt dragon with Vanth, during which time Djarin learned the story of how Mos Pelgo had been affected as the Empire pulled off Tatooine. After retrieving the armor, Djarin the embarked on a mission to bring a lady to the Trask at only sublught speeds, which he was able to do  despite a complication from New Republic pilots who were searching for Imperial holdouts that resulted in extensive damage to the ''Razor Crest''.

After arriving at a shadowport on Trask, Djarin eventually met Bo-Katan Kryze, who, with help from mandalorians Axe Woves and Koska Reeves, had attacked multiple transports from Gideon's Imperial remnant carrying combat equipment from the shadowport in an attempt to use the seized weapons to retake Mandalore from the remnant's control. After meeting Djarin, Bo-Katan recruited Djarin to help with her next raid in exchange for information on where to find a jedi, who was in fact the Jedi Outcast Ahsoka Tano. After floating the offer, Bo-Katan, along with the rest of her crew, took Djarin to see the carrier, where Imperial troops were loading it to depart the next morning. While watching the the freighter, Djarin asked if the plan was to stow away, to which Koska Reeves explained that since they had been hitting so hard, the Imperial remnant was now scanning for life forms before leaving as a precaution. Bo-Katan then explained that since the remnant freighter was required be use shipping lanes while near the port and as such could not climb to orbit, that would be when they would strike. Djarin then asked if there were and Imperial troops onboard the freighter, prompting Bo-Katan to explain there was a squad aboard the freighter at most, before Axe Woves then chimed in that the troopers could not hit a side of a bantha. In reality however, the transport had at least forty-six stormtroopers aboard.

thumb|left|300px|Stormtroopers guarding the outside of the ''Gozanti'' were quickly defeated as the mandalorian hijackers boarded the ship
The next morning, the ''Gozanti''-class Assault Carrier departed on schedule, entering the shipping lanes of the Trask shadowport before the Mandalorians then flew up to the carrier and sneakily took down two stormtroopers on guard on a walkway outside the ship's hull. Upon taking out the two stormtroopers, a third one exited the ship's hull and discovered the intruders, quickly informing the ship's bridge over the ship's built-in intercom before Reeves grabbed the trooper while activating her jetpack, ultimately dropping the stormtrooper on the viewport of the ship's bridge. Upon seeing the trooper on the viewport, the ship's captain, having been summoned to the bridge and informed of the pirates by the ship's security officer, ordered the stormtroopers near the bridge to guard the hall leading to it, before also ordering the ship's pilot to seal the hatch leading to the bridge, which they promptly did.

thumb|right|300px|A trio of stormtroopers that responded to the attempted hijacking were attacked by Bo-Katan
Meanwhile, a squad of three stormtroopers moved into the cargo arrived to the hallway just outside the door to the exterior to investigate the security breach. However, as soon as one trooper ordered the the squad to check the exterior door, they were attacked by Bo-Katan, who quickly dispatched of all three of them with a knife. The group of mandalorians then made their way deeper into the ship, where more stormtroopers on the level and in a turbolift opened fire on the group, forcing them to take cover behind structural supports. However, despite the Imperial troops' suppressing fire, the mandalorians still managed to defeat all of the stormtroopers while slowly advancing and dodging behind cover when necessary.

As the mandalorians proceeded further into the ship, the ship's captain requested an update over intercom on the situation and asked how many intruders there were. One trooper responded that there were ten while blasters went of nearby their location, though the ship's security officer noticed that there were only four life forms aboard, and quickly informed the captain. The trooper over the intercom then informed the bridge officers that the intruders were mandalorian before being shot and killed himself, causing the line to turn off. After a moment of silence on the bridge, the security officer informed the captain that the intruders were headed for the ship's cargo bay, prompting the captain to then ask the ship's pilot how long until they could clear the atmosphere and jump to hyperspace. The pilot responded that they could not climb until they left the harbor zone, though the captain ordered the pilot to make the ship climb anyways, causing the pilot to look over at the captain in silence before he repeated the order, which the pilot and security officer then began to carried out.

======Holding off the inevitable======

As the group of Mandalorians made their way to the cargo bay, a stormtrooper down the hall noticed the mandalorians and called out as much as the group of stormtroopers they were with began laying down suppressing fire on the mandalorians, forcing them to take cover. However, after the mandalorians did as much, Djarin threw a Smoke grenade down the hall towards the stormtroopers, and when it went off, the mandalorians left their cover with the heatmaps in their visors activated and shot down all the stormtroopers before making their way to the turbolift at the other end of the hall.

thumb|left|300px|The ship's deck officer and a squad of stormtroopers prepared to defend the cargo bay
Shortly after on the level of the cargo bay, a stormtrooper passed out some of the Imperial remnant's newly acquired E-22 reciprocating double-barreled blaster rifles to six stormtroopers. These stormtroopers then made there way to the cargo bay as stormtroopers carrying standard issue E-11 medium blaster rifles did the same, getting in position once the arrived while the ship's deck officer asked what was happening over comlink, to which the ship's captain responded that the intruders were heading towards the cargo bay, and the troops needed to hold the mandalorians off long enough that they could make the jump to hyperspace and rendezvous with Gideon's fleet. After hearing this, the deck officer confirmed he had heard their orders before relaxing their hand with the commlink, pulling out their SE-14r light repeating blaster, and relaying their orders to the surrounding stormtroopers while aiming their own Blaster pistol at the turbolift exit, joining the surrounding stormtroopers in doing so.

As the mandalorians exited the turbolift, they immediately took out two stormtroopers just outside the lift, causing the deck officer to order that all the doors be closed. Following the order, a stormtrooper attempted to ask a question, but was quickly cut off by the deck officer repeating the order. The stormtrooper, having moved next to a control panel then asked which one, to which the deck officer responded to close all of the doors. However, even after the doors surrounding entry area to the cargo bay closed, the mandalorians continued firing into the bay, causing the deck officer to continue repeating the order as the crew on the ship's deck listened on over the commlink. As another stormtrooper was shot dead, the doors finally closed, trapping the mandalorians and their oncoming blaster fire in the ship's cargo control area.

thumb|right|300px|Imperial troops trapped in the cargo bay were sucked out of the ''Gozanti''-class Assault Carrier
With the the intruders trapped, the deck officer sighed in relief and stood up as the surviving stormtroopers turned to look at them before observing the body of one of the fallen stormtroopers. The officer then commed to the bridge that they believed they had trapped the mandalorians, prompting the ship's captain to inquire as to where they had been trapped. The deck officer responded that they had trapped the mandalorians in the cargo control area, momentarily calming the captain, until they fully realized the implications and as such repeated their question to confirm the location. The deck officer repeated their answer to the captain, though they were quickly ejected from the ship alongside the rest of the stormtroopers on the deck shortly after as a result of the mandalorians opening the outer door.

Hearing the situation unfold from the bridge over the deck officer's commlink, which had managed to stay on the ship, the officers listened in silence as the realized what the situation, before the bridge's security officer then requested the deck officer to respond, though they initially did not receive a response. After repeating their question, Bo-Katan, using the deck officer's commlink, responded, before mockingly thanking the Imperials for packing up the gear so nicely and suggesting that the Imperials should imagine what a whole division of mandalorians could do with the gear on the ship. In response, the ship's captain responded to Bo-Katan that she would not get away with the weapons, as even if she had managed to jettison a few crates, the remnant would comb the entire area to hunt her down and kill her. Bo-Katan then responded that her squad would not be jettisoning anything and instead would be hijacking the entire ship, before mockingly suggesting to the captain to put some tea on as it would be a minute before they were there. However, as Bo-Katan deactivated the commlink, Djarin, who had only agreed to help steal weapons, confronted Bo-Katan about the change in plans. In response, Bo-Katan responded that there was something she once owned that she required if she was to rule Mandalore once again, which the Imperials knew the location of.

======Long live the Empire======

thumb|left|300px|The ''Gozanti''-class Assault Carrier's captain contacted Moff Gideon to request backup
Meanwhile, the ship's captain called Moff Gideon over hologram, who promptly asked the captain the issue was. The captain then informed Gideon of the pirate hijacking, prompting Gideon to ask the captain if they had been able to eliminate the hijackers, to which the captain explained they had not, and as such required backup immediately. Gideon then asked if the pirates were the same ones who had hijacked the Imperial remnant's other vessels, which after the captain shared that they appeared to be, prompted Gideon to ask how far the hijackers had gotten. The captain explained that the cargo hold had been breached and everything but the bridge had been taken, before once again requesting back. However, Gideon explained that since so much of the ship had already been taken, that was no longer an option, and as such told the captain to carry out the contingency they already knew, which the captain acknowledged with a nod. Hearing this, the two bridge officers glanced at each other while breathing heavily, before Gideon then chanted the phrase "Long live the Empire." The ship's captain then repeated the phrase, before pulling out their own blaster pistol and shooting both bridge officers dead and taking control of the ship, plunging it towards the surface of the estuary moon below.

thumb|right|300px|Stormtroopers attempted to protect the ''Gozanti'''s bridge
As the ship began to plunge, Bo-Katan realized what the remnant was doing and relayed it to the other mandalorians, before telling them to move quickly. However, as they reached the hall leading to the bridge, stormtroopers guarding the entrance laid down firing on the mandalorians from the cover of the bridge's first doorway, forcing the mandalorians to also take cover. As the stormtroopers continued to shoot suppressing fire down the hallway, Wolves estimated there were six to ten stormtroopers guarding the bridge, two of which wielding Heavy repeating blasters. Bo-Katan then tried to convince the group to move, though Wolves then pointed out that the troopers had too much firepower. However, the ''Gozanti''-class Assault Carrier began dropping rapidly, Djarin left the cover he was hiding behind with grenades in hand and began running down the firepower, the fire of the stormtroopers reflecting off his pure beskar armor. As Djarin reached the middle of the hallway, the firepower from stormtroopers became to much to handle and forced onto the ground, though not before Djarin quickly got on his knees and threw the grenades at the troopers, clearing the hallway of Imperial troops.

thumb|left|300px|Rather than take Bo-Katan to Moff Gideon, the ''Gozanti'''s captain chose to kill themself
With the hallway cleared, the mandalorian hijackers made their way to the bridge as the ship's captain continued to pilot the ship downward rapidly. As the bridge's doors opened, they turned to look at the mandalorians before looking forward again, though Djarin quickly grabbed him out of the pilot's seat before Bo-Katan pushed them against one of the bridge's walls and aimed a dagger attached to her armor at their neck. As Djarin and Reeves stabilized the ship, Bo-Katan questioned the captain if Gideon had the Darksaber, to which the captain stated she already knew the answer. After the ship began climbing again, Bo-Katan told the captain that she would let them live, though they had to take her to Gideon. However, the captain then told Bo-Katan that while she might let themself live, Gideon would not. After finishing their statement, the captain utilized an Electro capsule in their mouth to kill themself, causing Bo-Katan to scream out as their body fell on the floor. Shortly after, Reeves informed Bo-Katan that the captain had sent out a distress signal.

====Heir to the Empire====

thumb|right|300px|Grand Admiral Thrawn returned to the Galaxy and waged a campaign against the New Republic
By 9 ABY, Brendol Hux worked to deliver on Project Necromancer, while across the new Shadow Council, Captain Pellaeon worked to prepare the remnant for the long awaited return of Grand Admiral Thrawn from the Far galaxy, which Morgan Elsbeth eventually accomplished. Upon Thrawn's return, the Grand Admiral waged a campaign against the New Republic, but was eventually defeated. The New Republic kept the campaign and its details about its defense effort classified well until the Hosnian Cataclysm. Chalm Plesk, a University of Coruscant historian, tried to argue his case before the New Republic Senate, having been blocked from publishing his work, ''The Last War Against the Galactic Empire: On Deployment with the New Republic Fleet'', by various military figures for years.

====Era of peace====
By the generation conceived after the destruction of the second Death Star, these "victory kids" would learn of the battles of the past in textbooks, with the struggles of the Galactic Civil War soon becoming nothing more than a distant memory. Many of the Old Empire's orbital shipyards were destroyed,''Star Wars: The Force Awakens: Incredible Cross-Sections'' and Imperial collectors of stormtrooper helmets, banners, flags and other regalia of the Imperial armed forces often gave themselves outlandish titles&mdash;such as the Avenger of Jakku, Emperor's Wrath, and Interceptor Fire&mdash;in a quasi-homage to the late Empire. Others admired the fallen regime for its efficiency, vision, and massive military machine.

====The First Order====

thumb|left|300x330px|The First Order rose to power as the successor of the Galactic Empire.
With the Empire's collapse, many of the Emperor's servants including many former members of the political, military, and scientific Imperial establishment, fled into the Unknown Regions with some of the regime's greatest secrets. The Attendants, a retinue of mute alien navigators commanded by Snoke, assisted these former Imperial officers, nobles, technologists and warlords in crossing the ancient hyperspace trails.''Star Wars: The Last Jedi: The Visual Dictionary'' There, for nearly three decades after Endor, the former Empire would recoalesce itself as the mysterious First Order. By 21 ABY,The events of ''Shadow of the Sith'' take place in 21 ABY per 'Star Wars: Timelines the tattered remnants of the Empire had fled into the farthest reaches of galactic space, but an obscure command structure had started to emerge within the Unknown Regions. Although the Imperial holdouts based in the Unknown Regions were still scattered during that time, one Imperial remnant that followed the growing chain of command remained active in the main space of the galaxy and established an alliance with the Corporate Sector Authority.''Shadow of the Sith'' In time, the remnant situated in the Unknown Regions transformed''The Star Wars Book'' from once scattered holdouts into the First Order, specifically forming into what would be the First Order military.

Situated in the galaxy's vast frontier, the growing First Order rapidly expanded and colonized newly discovered star systems, while new bases, shipyards, and weapons labs began churning out a technologically advanced military in a bid to conquer the galaxy. Furthermore, a number of surviving Imperial Remnants, which were festering by that time, were brought into the First Order apparatus and helped it bloom. Armitage Hux became a general in the First Order, and inherited his father's ambition to train a new army of stormtroopers that was superior to the Imperial generation. Inspired by the memory of the Galactic Empire and composed of various military leaders of the former regime, the First Order fought for control of the galaxy against the Resistance, a private military force led by General Leia Organa and funded by like-minded senators in the New Republic who believed the Order posed a greater threat than many believed.

====The Final Order====

thumb|right|300px|Palpatine cheated death and slowly prepared for his eventual return to rule the Galaxy once again with the power of the Final Order
As the First Order took shape during the chaos of the New Republic Era reigned, the sith cult known as the Sith Eternal, using technology highly advanced science, specifically bioengineering, cloning, and behavioral programming, in turn, all specifically of Kaminoan origin, allowed Emperor Palpatine not only return to life, but also achieve eternal life, doing so on the Unknown Regions world of Exegol. As this happened, the Sith Eternal continued work on preparing the return of the Galactic Empire for Palpatine in the form of the Final Order,''Star Wars: The Rise of Skywalker: Expanded Edition'' of which it's military contained thousands of ''Xyston-class'' Star Destroyers, star destroyers each armed with superlasers able to destroy entire planets. To ensure that his return would be unchallenged by remaining Imperial forces, Sidious dispatched Snoke, an artificial strandcast, to control the First Order and ensure it's loyalty to the Final Order.

==Organization==
===Government===

thumb|left|250px|The Galactic Empire was ruled by Darth Sidious, who declared himself Emperor after the Clone Wars.
The First Galactic Empire was a fascist dictatorship led by a Galactic Emperor and enforced by a vast Imperial Military. The Emperor acted as the sovereign ruler and ultimate authority in all political and military matters of state. Aiding the Emperor was a Grand Vizier, who was the head of the Imperial Ruling Council, which in turn consisted of advisors who wielded considerable powers over all aspects of the Empire's political and military apparatus. While supposedly bound by the Imperial Charter, Imperial rulers were largely above the law.

The legislature consisted of the former Republic Galactic Senate, renamed the Imperial Senate. As an autocracy, the democratic and forward-thinking policies of the former Republic became obsolete within the new corridors of power. The Imperial Senate lost the prestige it once held as the forum for galactic debate as Palpatine took away whatever authority it had in his march towards total control over the galaxy. The Senate became a rubber-stamp needed for passing legislation, which could be overruled by the Emperor for any reason, before it was dissolved entirely by the Emperor in 1 BBY, effectively wiping away the last remnants of the Old Republic. Legislative authority over the various star systems and sectors passed directly to regional governors&mdash;effectively transforming the Empire into a stratocracy.

thumb|right|250px|Through the Empire, the Sith secretly controlled the galaxy for a generation.
Amongst high-ranking military personnel, a mere reference to Emperor Palpatine was enough to instill fear, similar to the reputation of his lieutenant, Darth Vader, who was frequently styled as a "Lord"''Doctor Aphra'' (2016) 35 and treated with a similar fearful deference. Many considered Vader to be Palpatine's right-hand man&mdash;a living weapon&mdash;and viewed him as the natural successor to the Emperor's legacy. In reality, the Emperor planned to live forever by uncovering the secrets to immortality via dark-side research into Sith alchemy, as epitomized by Project Blackwing.''Star Wars: Commander'', "The Sickness" campaign Indeed, the Empire lacked a clear chain of succession following both Palpatine and Vader's deaths. Also in a high position was Wilhuff Tarkin, a ruthless officer whom Palpatine had groomed for a leadership role for years. Palpatine, Vader, and Tarkin formed the dark triumvirate in control of the Empire. Following the loss of leadership at the Battle of Endor, with Tarkin having died years prior at Yavin, Imperial head of government, Grand Vizier Mas Amedda attempted to keep the Empire together, while new pretenders to the Imperial throne announced their ascension to power on a near daily basis.

Owing to a lack of communication, Imperial messages surrounding Palpatine's death were contradictory. Some such as Grand Moff Lozen Tolruck of Imperial territory G5-623 suggested that the Emperor had escaped the Death Star II through miraculous means. Others claimed the even wilder notion that the Emperor was still leading the Empire from beyond the grave. Some simply refused to acknowledge the Emperor's death for months. In order to counter the reports of the Emperor's demise, a proxy actor was installed in his place. Eventually, the truth of the Emperor's fate became known to the general citizenry. Declarations of a new Emperor were announced almost every day, but none were able to consolidate any substantial power. Splinter fleets and other Imperial officials fought each other to support the various claimants to the throne; the Empire was thus shattered into numerous warring factions, instead of standing as a single united bloc.

In the months following the Battle of Endor, Grand Admiral Rae Sloane became publicly recognized as the ''de facto'' head of the Galactic Empire and Imperial Navy. In reality, power was held by Fleet Admiral Gallius Rax and his Shadow Council. On Coruscant, Amedda, the ''de jure'' ruler of the Empire and proxy Emperor, was held under house arrest by Gallius Rax. Mon Mothma refused to accept his surrender unless he could find a way to surrender the entire Empire. During the covert Imperial-backed Liberation Day terror attack on Chandrila, Sloane's aide Adea Rite executed a failed assassination attempt on the Grand Admiral per secret orders of Rax after Sloane refused to join his forces. Rax publicly claimed shock at the assumed death of Sloane. Instead of taking the mantle of Emperor, Rax chose the title Counselor to the Empire, vowing to act as an interstitial leader until the Grand Admiral's return. He was ultimately killed during the Battle of Jakku when his remnant forces battled the New Republic.

thumb|left|250px|The Imperial Ruling Council consisted of advisors who governed the Empire on behalf of their ruler.
While Emperor Palpatine held sole and supreme power within the Empire, he typically eschewed the day-to-day affairs of his government to others. In doing so, he was free to conduct extensive research into the dark side of the Force and enjoy his rule over the galaxy without needing to worry about boring bureaucracy. As such, the mundane decision-making of the Empire's executive branch was conducted by the Imperial Ruling Council. The council was led by Grand Vizier Mas Amedda and the Emperor's closest advisors: Sate Pestage, Janus Greejatus, Ars Dangor, Kren Blista-Vanee and Prelate Verge. These individuals constituted the uppermost tier of the Imperial hegemony and wielded considerable powers over officers within the military. Greejatus and Sim Aloo, another advisor involved in day-to-day governing, were also busy in hunting down Sith artifacts for Sidious. Moffs, generals and admirals all were answerable to the Imperial cadre, but even the councilors were not always privy to the doings of Imperial Intelligence. After the Emperor largely retired from public life, Vizier Amedda and the rest of the Ruling Council took to dispatching processions of Imperial skylimos to maintain an illusion that the Emperor still moved about in public.

As the Emperor's apprentice and second in command, Lord Vader acted as the informal Commander-in-Chief of the Imperial Military. Following the Cylo Hijacking, Palpatine elevated Vader to an official position, that of supreme commander of the Imperial fleet.''Star Wars: The Rise and Fall of the Galactic Empire'' The Emperor's Fist,''Age of Rebellion - Darth Vader'' 1 as he was referred to by many, was also apparently granted nearly carte blanche to execute subordinates who displeased him. Even in his new role, Vader had little involvement in administrative matters, which he let the Joint Chiefs handle from behind the scenes, and adopted a more frontline command style. Like his master, the Dark Lord considered the Empire to be a mere tool for them to use in their quest for greater power in, and understanding of, the dark side.

With the Ruling Council's inability to run the Empire following the deaths of Emperor Palpatine and Lord Vader in 4 ABY, Fleet Admiral Gallius Rax proposed a new executive branch called the Shadow Council that would be a more covert and militaristic body than the Ruling Council it sought to replace. The Shadow Council would consist of various advisors, admirals and generals with Grand Admiral Rae Sloane as the group's ''de facto'' leader until her supposed "disappearance."

thumb|right|250px|The Imperial Senate served as the Empire nominal legislative organ until it was disbanded by the Emperor.
Seeing whatever power it had left stripped away by acts like the Public Order Resentencing Directive, the Imperial Senate was reduced to the lower tier of government and gradually lost the prestige it once held as the forum for galactic debate. An increasing number of senators became entangled in the web of corruption, as had begun earlier in the Republic Era; in the days of the Galactic Republic, Sidious had encouraged and exploited those engaged in the pursuit of power and greed as part of his rise to emperorship. Many senators also became used to simply signing off on the Emperor's demands.''Rogue One Adaptation'' 1 The Senate became a servile institute that applauded Palpatine's decrees and agreed to his demands without much thought. That the Senate continued to exist provided the illusion that the Emperor was following "the will of the people" when, in reality, he acted out of his own interests.''Darth Vader'' (2017) 13

With the once-powerful Senate firmly in Palpatine's hands, passing legislation became a mere formality for the New Order as it agreed to the Emperor's every declaration, even if Senators and galactic citizens were made to believe that they had a voice in galactic politics. In reality, Palpatine held unlimited executive power and was the only one who could formally pass legislation. While most feared to speak out against the Emperor, a few, such as Bail and Leia Organa of Alderaan, actively questioned the accountability of the Empire and its actions, much to the ire of Imperial authorities. Suspicions eventually arose that Leia Organa was using her diplomatic immunity to help the Rebel Alliance. The Empire also lied to the Senate about the destruction of Jedha City, claiming that it was a mining accident. The Emperor used Leia's capture aboard the ''Tantive IV'', which was known to be carrying technical readouts for the Death Star, as an excuse for disbanding the Imperial Senate shortly before the Battle of Yavin. With the dissolution of the Senate, the last remnants of the Old Republic had been swept away, and the legislative authority over the various systems and sectors passed directly to the regional governors&mdash;effectively transitioning governance into military jurisdiction, who answered directly to the Emperor.

thumb|left|250px|Wilhuff Tarkin was a Grand Moff.
Territories from the Core Worlds to the Outer Rim Territories were overseen by regional sector governors, or Moffs, who as part of the Imperial Military wielded much of the power over each sector and who enforced the Galactic Emperor's rule across each sector.''Lando'' 2 This stemmed from the Sector Governance Decree that Palpatine passed during the later stages of the Clone Wars, when he was Supreme Chancellor of the Galactic Republic. With only twenty Moffs at one time, they were answerable to the Ruling Council, and all positions were dominated by humans. They themselves were outranked by the position of Grand Moff, established in 14 BBY and first granted to Moff Wilhuff Tarkin, who were governors of oversectors, areas of space that contained several planetary sectors and were used to keep the Moffs or sector governors in control. After the Imperial Senate was disbanded, all legislative power went to regional governors just before the Battle of Yavin.

After Emperor Sheev Palpatine's death during the Battle of Endor, Imperial territories fell into total unrest, with some military leaders such as Valco Pandion appointing themselves Grand Moffs, while corrupt sector governors began accepting payments for the New Republic's allocation of Imperial ships or suing for peace. Other governors, such as Grand Moff Lozen Tolruck of Imperial territory G5-623 and Governor of the Anoat sector Ubrik Adelhard, broke off from the Empire, forming Imperial remnants.

===Administration and bureaucracy===

thumb|right|180px|COMPNOR recruitment poster ''COMPNOR Recruitment'' by [[Dasita Lyros]]
While the Emperor maintained a galactic armada and commanded the undisputed military, scientific, and economic hegemony in the entire galaxy, the ever-present fear of surviving Jedi haunted Palpatine throughout his reign. In direct response to this feared threat, the Empire employed numerous dark side adepts, Force-sensitive individuals of the Inquisitorius trained to track down and eliminate any surviving Jedi. Due to the nature of their mission, Inquisitors could commandeer local Imperial forces and possessed authority over other officers in the Imperial Military.''Star Wars: Absolutely Everything You Need to Know'' The Inquisitorius was governed by Lord Vader, the Emperor's handpicked second in command, who oversaw the Empire's hunting of the Jedi Knights in the Great Jedi Purge.

While dark-side leanings and occult goals may have fascinated the Empire's ruler, the banal commonalities of ruling a galaxy-wide Empire never failed to impress upon the Imperial leadership. With the rise of the New Order, many previous governmental agencies were renamed and repurposed, while many official buildings saw themselves remodeled to fit a darker and more angular aesthetic. One such agency was the Republic-era COMPOR, newly dubbed COMPNOR, the Commission for the Preservation of the New Order. COMPOR and the ISB operated under the secretive Select Committee.''Dawn of Rebellion''

COMPNOR served as the Empire's chief umbrella agency dedicated to ensuring order and stability for the countless worlds under the Emperor's rule while supporting the new regime through both propaganda and intelligence services. Organizations such as the Imperial Security Bureau worked under its oversight, with the ISB helping to stamp out potential dissident actions. Also working under the auspices of COMPNOR was the Ministry of Information, designated under the Coalition for Progress. The Ministry was primarily tasked with muzzling the HoloNet News Agency of anti-Imperial messaging and ensuring the necessary infrastructure for the vast communications systems within the Empire. It also worked to monitor the Imperial Press Corps at the grand COMPNOR arcology, located in the Federal District of Coruscant, Level 5127.

The Empire also maintained the Imperial Information Office, which employed civilians to help the Empire and its massive data operations in the galaxy, allowing employees the option to cybernetically enhance their performance with AJ^6 cyborg constructs. The Ministry of Agriculture and Imperial Agricultural Collective oversaw the horticultural aspect of Imperial dominion, with officials on many worlds across the galaxy, including Lothal.''Servants of the Empire: Edge of the Galaxy'' The Economics Ministry, Education Ministry, Weather Ministry, Transportation Ministry and Imperial Survey Corps also employed numerous citizens across the Empire.''Servants of the Empire: Imperial Justice''

In addition to ruling through fear, the Empire ensured the Outer Rim was faced with hunger while it was expanding into the region, using the tactic on such a large scale it made former Padawan Ahsoka Tano uncomfortable. Following the Battle of Endor, COMPNOR was reorganized into the Office of Imperial Promotion, Galactic Truth, and Fact Correction.

===Military===

thumb|right|250px|Stormtroopers could be both the elite shock troops and main infantry of the Galactic Empire.
As the direct successor to the Republic Military, the Imperial Military comprised vast numbers of warships and countless soldiers. One of the most recognizable warships was the ''Imperial''-class Star Destroyer, and the mere sight of one usually was enough to bring a troublesome system in line. Rule through fear of force rather than force itself was the driving philosophy throughout the Imperial Military, epitomized by the Tarkin Doctrine. Bolstered by the near limitless resources at the Empire's disposal and loyalist companies, such as Taim & Bak, Borstel, and ''Phylon Transport'', corporations, such as Kuat Drive Yards and its subsidiary Kuat Systems Engineering produced many of the New Order's Star Destroyers, as well as the formidable All Terrain Armored Transport, which was frequently deployed at hot spots throughout the galaxy. If it meant securing victory in a battle, the Empire was often fine with civilian casualties.

The All Terrain Armored Transport walker became to be feared for its formidable chin-mounted heavy laser cannons, while lighter walkers such as the All Terrain Defense Pod featured a single laser cannon able to be rotated independent of the walkers front-facing direction, and were deployed primarily to protect Imperial Military interests on backwater worlds. BlasTech Industries was the primary weapons producer for the widely used E-11 medium blaster rifle. The Aratech Repulsor Company manufactured the 614-AvA speeder bike, commonly referred to as the Imperial speeder bike, which would eventually be replaced by the 74-Z.''Star Wars Rebels: Head to Head'' Sienar Fleet Systems produced many of the Empire's Imperial TIE fighters and variants, such as the TIE/ad v1, which was originally unveiled on Empire Day and featured dual chin-mounted laser cannons and the ability to launch warheads such as the XX-23 S-thread tracker. The TIE Advanced x1 naturally became the next evolution of the deadly v1, as well as the preferred craft of Lord Vader. In addition, the Empire inherited the military assets of the defunct Separatist movement&mdash;the most notable of which was the Death Star.

thumb|left|350px|Imperial Army soldiers were the standard infantry of the galaxy-spanning empire.
Although only promoted to supreme commander of the Imperial fleet late in the Empire's reign, Lord Vader was seen by many as the ''de facto'' Commander-in-Chief. Nonetheless, the Imperial Military had an overall Supreme Commander, who formulated the strategy to fit the Emperor's agenda and held control over the entirety of the Empire's war machine. Leading the armed forces under their supervision were highly trained admirals, generals and Moffs who were instructed at the numerous Imperial Academy complexes throughout the galaxy. Several veteran officers also formerly served in the Galactic Republic, with decorated members such as Wullf Yularen. During the sixth year of the Emperor's reign, twenty Moffs answered directly to the Imperial Ruling Council. The title of Grand Moff was specifically created for Wilhuff Tarkin, while other Moffs, such as Tiaan Jerjerrod and Therbon sought to increase their reputation with Palpatine.

Some ambitious Imperial officers even supported insurgent activities with later plans to betray and destroy them in hopes of a promotion. It was not uncommon for high-ranking officials to maintain private investments, with Hiram Zataire owning large plantations and a vineyard on Naboo, and Cassio Tagge being a member of the House of Tagge, which held ownership of TaggeCo and its mining facility at Lucazec.''The Rebellion Begins'' One high ranking Imperial officer''Vader - Dark Visions'' 4 would serve as the Minister of War.

thumb|right|250px|The Imperial Navy was tasked with maintaining order across the Empire.
The Imperial Army and Navy were responsible for carrying out the Empire's military operations across the galaxy. Ostensibly dedicated to maintaining law and order, Imperial Military forces came to be feared and fled from. Perhaps the most ubiquitously visible element were the Imperial stormtroopers. These faceless soldiers were the enforcers of Imperial order, often exercising a "shoot-first" policy. Having sworn their unquestioning loyalty to the Emperor above all, stormtroopers carried out many of the regime's worst crimes.''Star Wars Rebels: Rebels Versus Empire Ultimate Sticker Book'' Following the Battle of Endor, the Galactic Empire's martial forces began to suffer both resource and personnel shortages, ultimately forcing untrained and untested recruits to fill the front lines in the Imperial war effort, while the once-mighty Imperial Navy of thirteen Super Star Destroyers was reduced to one, the ''Ravager'', which was ultimately destroyed during the Battle of Jakku. After the end of the Galactic Civil War with the signing of the Galactic Concordance, the mobilization and training of stormtroopers was prohibited.

Tarkin noted an "institutionalized suspicion" within the Imperial Military, which he believed was used as a tool by Emperor Palpatine to control the various members of the Empire and its numerous organizations. There also existed an intense fear of the Emperor and Lord Vader, mainly due to harsh punishments, such as death or torture, if a task was not completed in time or resulted in failure. Imperial patrol transports and stormtroopers were often utilized as the local police force for numerous worlds, while off-duty personnel could frequent local venues and neighborhoods after signing out of their local garrison. The euphemism "off-base, recreation," was used in the Imperial Military when referring to the visiting of various mistresses or cantinas by personnel, while out of consideration it was common for duty officers to ask no questions about such escapades. Members within the Imperial Army believed that those stationed farthest from the Imperial Center were deemed less important to the New Order, causing many to resent deployments on remote worlds such as Belderone.

thumb|left|250px|The Empire sterilized the Geonosian population, bringing the species to the brink of extinction.
The Empire frequently ignored the Galactic Accord of Systems, effectively obliberating the rules it laid out on how to wage war. The Empire conducted numerous atrocities, often resulting in genocide owing to the Empire's humanocentric tendencies. On Geonosis, the Empire sterilized the planet's native Geonosian population with heavy bombing.''Darth Vader'' (2015) 4 The Lasat homeworld of Lasan was ecologically destroyed by the later banned T-7 ion disruptor rifles, and the entire species was almost wiped out. Furthermore, to make advances in bio-warfare, Vice Admiral Perwin Gedde tested ancient diseases on captive worlds, raining sickness from sub-orbital battleships.

A vast distribution network existed within the Empire, with numerous warehouses on various worlds holding thousands of biological agents. Biological testing was conducted on planets such as Coyerti or against primitive indigenous populations and Wookiee slaves. While most research and development went unhindered, a few initiatives went out of control. On Dandoran, the accidental release of a highly contagious virus under the code name Project Blackwing&mdash;a clandestine effort seeking to uncover the secrets to immortality&mdash;ultimately led to an outbreak across the planet.''Star Wars: Commander''

===Ideology===

thumb|200px|right|A propaganda poster featuring the Grand Inquisitor, leader of the Inquisitorius
The New Order referred to the political religion and nationalist ideology of the Empire and the values of which it stood by. Numerous organizations were folded under COMPNOR, the Commission for the Preservation of the New Order. These included the Imperial Security Bureau, Coalition for Progress, Imperial Intelligence, and CompForce, along with science divisions and youth education initiatives. Rothwell once remarked that the Empire, as an institution, was unable to be swayed from whatever narrative it convinced itself of, even if it was not true.''Hunters: Battle for the Arena''

The Galactic Empire wielded a vast and powerfully effective propaganda machine to shift the opinions and cultures of numerous worlds across the galaxy. Celebrating the end of the destructive Clone Wars and the creation of the New Order, the Emperor founded Empire Day as the national holiday of the Empire. The song "Glory of the Empire" served as the national anthem. Due to physical alterations to Palpatine to make him look younger and more appealing in broadcasts, many citizens did not know of the Emperor's scarred appearance, nor did they comprehend that the galaxy was under the command of a Sith Lord.''Ultimate Star Wars''

thumb|250px|left|Stormtroopers were seen as brutal enforcers of Imperial suppression to the citizens of the outlier regions of the galaxy.
To enhance its legitimacy in the eyes of the people, the Empire used the duel in Palpatine's office to officially support the idea of a "Jedi Rebellion" occurring, and that the Jedi Order had attempted to stage a coup intent on taking control of the Republic, thus necessitating Order 66. In the years after the proclamation of the New Order, all remaining recordings of the Jedi were removed, with many eventually believing and supporting the Emperor's version of events. However, individuals such as Zaluna Myder and even Luke Skywalker questioned the Empire's account of the events leading up to their destruction, while those who knew the Jedi in person could not bring themselves to believe in a Jedi-led coup. Those who attempted to distribute independent publications could be punished with imprisonment without term.

Nonetheless, with the end of the Clone Wars and the dismantling of the Separatist Droid Army, a renewed sense of peace and prosperity returned to the Core. This peace was aided by the efforts of the Coalition for Progress division of COMPNOR, who took note when artistic media appeared to undermine the Empire, using its authority in one instance to dismantle a statue of Janyor of Bith on the Outer Rim world of Garel, or by banning subversive operas such as the Song of Lojuun and sending members of the band Hakko Drazlip and the Tootle Froots to work in the mines of Kessel after a song with political undertones mocked Lord Vader, with the song being declared contraband as a result.

As a regime, the Empire emboldened those who wanted to be cruel and excise power over others. Many stormtroopers would take advantage of the Empire for their own personal gain, including using their station to take advantage of the helpless and those weaker than them. The regime was also one of imperialism, with the aim to become a universal superpower. The Sith drew power from the dark side and fear in the population, as the Sith believed that fear was an important tool. Even though Palpatine himself did not display bigotry to aliens, many of his citizens were. Their prejudice for alien groups turned alien groups into scapegoats for past troubles.

===Security===
====Law Enforcement====

thumb|180px|A Coruscant Security Force police officer during the Imperial Era
The Imperial Security Bureau (Shortened to ISB) oversaw internal state security and ensuring the loyalty of citizens to the Empire,''Star Wars Rebels: The Visual Guide'' with the task of maintaining stability throughout Imperial territories. Imperial Intelligence provided services on their own accord, and dealt primary with military matters,''Cyphers and Masks'' such as threat reports, analysis, managing assets who were gathered information, and providing briefings to the Joint Chiefs and the Emperor. It fell under the leadership of Ubiqtorate, which was the leadership of Imperial Intelligence. Some of the local planetary security forces also had some responsibility in regards to law enforcement.

Mining stations, deep-space outposts, or jails far from the cosmopolitan core often used Imperial Navy Troopers as security personnel, who, while still imposing, commanded less respect than their stormtrooper brethren. Vast trading posts, such as the Ring of Kafrene in the Thand sector, used mainly stormtroopers to enforce law and order on its streets.

Private contracts were occasionally given to the Bounty Hunters' Guild and freelance bounty hunters to track down elusive elements within the Empire, although this practice was largely frowned upon. In order to support law enforcement communications, the Empire maintained the Imperial Office of Criminal Investigations. The Office was responsible for the Imperial Enforcement DataCore, which could only be accessed by authorized Imperial personnel or licensed bounty hunters.''Ezra's Gamble''

The Ministry of Ingress on Coruscant was the organization responsible for processing immigrants arriving on capital.''Star Wars: Complete Locations'' The Empire also maintained an Anti-Terrorism Watchline for civilian tips about "terrorist" sightings, such as if a civilian discovered a Rebel Alliance operation.''Crimson Reign'' 2

====Legal system====

thumb|left|250px|An Imperial Judge on Niamos
Shortly after the beginning of the Imperial Era, the Galactic Empire standardized and revised The galactic legal system''Star Wars: Scum and Villainy: Case Files on the Galaxy's Most Notorious'' by creating the Imperial Penal Code, which introduced a tiered infraction system with Class Five infractions being the least serious while Class One Offenses were the most serious crimes. The penal code overrode local legislation and customs to ensure that Imperial interests were always primary, though the duty to try and incarcerate criminals often fell local judges unless a crime had been actively been committed directly against the Galactic Empire. Despite a defense being allowed civil cases, in trials against the Empire, defenses were actively disallowed. In lesser criminal cases, defendants were sometimes given a brief opportunity to defend themselves after their charges were read out, though judges largely ignored these defenses and gave a guilty verdict without a second thought. No matter if criminals were tried via local or Imperial judges, those found guilty would regardless find themselves brought into the Imperial prison system.

====Prison system====

thumb|right|250px|Inmates at their workstations in an Imperial factory facility
Following the rise of the Galactic Empire, the new state inherited the various types of prisons from the Galactic Republic's vast and large prison system. Yet even still, the Galactic Empire began constructing more bespoke and larger supermax prison facilities known as Imperial factory facilities where inmates were used as laborers to fuel the Imperial war machine such as on Julibar, where inmates made the "toes" of All Terrain Armored Transports. While inmates who had committed serious offenses were either kept in isolation or simply executed, prisoners who had committed mid-level infractions, once assessed as labor worthy, were put to work in Imperial factory facilities as their sentences were long enough to learn specific tasks, but they still had the hope of one day being released. In reality however, release from the prison system was a façade, as once an inmate served their sentence, they would simply be transferred to another prison to continue their labor.

thumb|left|250px|A labor camp on Wobani
Outside of Imperial factory facilities, the Empire also utilized traditional Labor camps, such as one located on Wobani. At these labor camps, the Empire could force prisoners to undertake any type of work, as prisoners believed they were working their way to freedom. The Empire often centralized the locations of prisons, keeping them near each other on so-called "prison worlds" such as the planet Garen IV. Despite many inmates simply being transferred to other prisons after their first sentence, some inmates were released. At labor camps, Stormtroopers were often used as guards,''Rogue One: A Star Wars Story'' though at Imperial factory facilities, guards and wardens wore black boiler suits with imperial insignia on the right upper arm and white markings along the left shoulder, arm, torso, and leg. The guards were additionally equipped with zap rods and DH-17 blaster pistols, though Imperial factory prisons were often understaffed. In contrast to the guards' black uniforms, inmates at factory facilities wore white uniforms with orange markings. Prisoners were brought to prisons via a modified variant of the Imperial Troop Transport known as an Imperial Prison Transport

It was the Imperial Bureau of Punitive Correction that oversaw "punitive corrections" for prisoners; while it advertized such measures as ways for inmates to learn new skills while repaying their debts to the Empire, Imperial prisoners were, out of the public's sight, made into unpaid laborers, constructing material for the Imperial war machine or other purposes in isolated factory prisons or labor camps.

===Outside relations===
====With other governments====

thumb|right|200px|An Ambassador of the Galactic Empire
The Diplomatic Service of the Galactic Empire maintained outside relations with several independent affiliates and corporate entities. Diplomats moved throughout the galaxy for negotiations and talks. However, the Empire was more than willing to assert its will or take what it wanted by force if negotiations did not go its way. One of its affiliates was the Preox-Morlana, a corporate authority that politically administered the Free Trade sector and was left operated independently by the Empire. However, high-ranking officials of the Preox-Morlana would attend meetings with the Empire, while Imperial censuses would cover Preox-Morlana worlds. Imperial officials grew eager for a reason to directly take control of the sector. In 5 BBY, that excuse came with the Preox-Morlana's failure to capture Cassian Andor on Ferrix, which exploded into a public enough failure that the Empire could annex its territory.

The Galactic Empire also had diplomatic relations with the Chiss Ascendancy in the Unknown Regions of sorts through their mutual servant, Grand Admiral Thrawn.''Thrawn'' Unknown to the Chiss, however, the Emperor came to seek complete control over the Chiss Ascendancy.''Thrawn: Treason'' The people of the ice moon Madurs were occupied by the Empire despite Prime Minister Dreand Yens thinking he could represent his people through diplomatic talks, during which he had declined the Empire's low offer for the moon's carnium supply. Only realizing how the Empire had set the stage for its operation, while he'd been distracted with lies about a new art expo and negotiations, after the fact, Yens later remarked that his people were wrapped up in chains while he was busy with "polite conversation."

====With the criminal underworld====

The Empire remained invested in and had a relationship with the criminal underworld. The criminal faction Crimson Dawn, while secretly under the control of Maul, maintained a working relationship with the Empire. According to Enfys Nest of the Cloud-Riders, the Dawn used its profits to terrorize countless systems alongside the Imperials. The Empire also was invested in the affairs of the Pyke Syndicate: when a slave revolt opened up on Kessel, an Imperial blockade was quickly dispatched to settle the uprising. Despite its investment in the criminal underworld, the Empire would need to combat parts of it, which would distract from other campaigns like the war with the Rebel Alliance.

Above all other syndicates, the Empire had a special relationship with the Hutt Clan, which was allowed to operate outside of Imperial law in return for certain valuable services. The relationship also saw the Empire protect the Hutt Clan's claim over Hutt Space. While the Empire could be very demanding with the Hutts, clan leader Jabba respected Emperor Palpatine and saw the importance of their work together.''War of the Bounty Hunters'' 5 Various other criminal groups desired the relationship with the Empire held by the Hutts, with a chance seeming to open up after the Hutt attack on the ''Executor'' manipulated into being by Crimson Dawn. Months later, Palpatine personally put an end to the Syndicate War by contacting the heads of various warring families, reminding them that they were all servants to his will: while they each had their own dominions, the galaxy overall was his to control, thus placing each crime lord under his rule as well. While he did promise any faction that could find Dawn leader Q'ira would rise in his estimation, his talk made it clear that each crime lord needed to think of themself as a servant to his will.

==Economy==
===Overview===

The Galactic Empire adopted a planned economy, whereby production and distribution of goods were centralized and directed in the immediate aftermath of the Clone Wars. This policy of nationalization was called imperialization. Despite this, numerous third-party corporations were allowed to remain, with major loyalist companies Kuat Drive Yards and Sienar Fleet Systems producing the majority of the Empire's land and space-based craft. Companies aligned with the Confederacy of Independent Systems during the Clone Wars, such as the Techno Union and Trade Federation, were absorbed by the newly formed Empire, and all Federation accounts plundered by Imperial financier Arsin Crassus. By 1 BBY, both Incom Corporation and the Corellian Engineering Corporation had been nationalized.

Senator Mon Mothma stated that the Empire made use of kleptocractic economics, which entailed those in power claiming riches for themselves like thieves,''Star Wars: Uprising''&mdash;Crew Member: "Tei-Untisian Pickpocket" all while the population was controlled via populist messaging, such as scaremongering and propaganda.''Star Wars Jedi: Survivor'' In truth, the average worker was able to be exploited, particularly in the Outer Rim, so as to support the state and the wealthy. Among the population, it was the wealthy, particularly those in the Core Worlds, who the Empire was actually kind to. In addition to the Imperial Mining Institute, the Empire held a close association with Mining Guild. Towards the end of the Galactic Civil War, Fleet Admiral Gallius Rax began to nationalize all aspects of the Imperial production chain in the months following Endor, but the attempt proved unable to save the dying Empire. The continued funding of the Imperial Military was hotly disputed. While briefly considered, it was decided that plundering the InterGalactic Banking Clan and other monetary bodies would plunge the galaxy into an economic depression.

In 19 BBY, the Republic credit was replaced by the Imperial credit, which became the standard currency in circulation throughout the Empire. With the advent of the New Order, credits from the time of the Galactic Republic became worthless as they were phased out. Raising enough money for day-to-day life proved to be difficult for many Imperial citizens, yet the Empire's propaganda made the regime seem more prosperous than it actually was. In one recorded speech, Senator Daho Sejan blamed economic and security issues on "terrorists" who hid among everyday citizens. As of 9 BBY, the Empire's taxation of the Outer Rim had become oppressive. Since the Imperial credit was a fiat currency, credits from the Empire gradually lost their value following the formation of the New Republic.

===Infrastructure===

A vast transportation network to connect Palpatine's vast Empire served as the primary means of both civilian and military transport. Interstellar commerce and warfare primarily occurred along one of several major hyperspace lanes&mdash;considered trans-galactic highways&mdash;with their knowledge and existence dating back to well before the former Galactic Republic. With the major trade routes considered safe for hyperspace travel, their control was vital for maintaining an effective means of defense and galactic dominance. In smaller systems, hyperspace beacons could transmit their coordinates, allowing starships to make quick jumps to and from the system. As a result, destroying them could hinder enemy mobility and response times. Serving this vast system were spaceports, facilities where starships would dock and refuel, restock and rearm. Spaceships serving as fuel stations also existed in the vastness of the galaxy, along with major shipping ports such as Horizon Base.

thumb|left|300px|An Imperial cargo ship docked at a space port
The Imperial Transit Authority oversaw transportation across the Empire while the Imperial Boarding Inspection and Customs handled customs enforcement on those craft, as well as inspecting the starships themselves.''Star Wars: Smuggler's Guide'' Owing to the immense size of the Empire, a vast, complex logistical network was maintained by the Imperial hierarchy, and as a result was both immensely interconnected and extremely fragile. Locales such as Mardona III served as "warehouse worlds": planets turned storehouses for millions of metric tons of goods to fuel the Empire. Imperial cargo ships often transported these resources across the galaxy; slovenly and low-quality personnel, or fresh recruits just out of the Academy, often crewed these vessels, owing to their rather menial task. The T-44 landspeeder saw use by members of the Imperial Military for transport. Despite Imperial propaganda painting the picture of a government interested in uplifting life for all who fell under the Imperial flag, the Imperial system, its taxation program, and general expansion were built around uplifting life in the Core Worlds, extracting the wealth of the outer regions and funneling it inward.

As once noted by Lando Calrissian, the entire galaxy ran on Tibanna gas as a vital fuel source. As such, the Imperial annexation of Cloud City and Bespin overall was an advantage to the Empire. After the Battle of Endor, the lockdown of the Anoat sector&mdash;where Tibanna gas was found in large quantities, such as on Bespin&mdash;proved to be a danger to the young New Republic, which suddenly was cut off from a major source of fuel in its earliest days. According to Calrissian's fears, the Empire would effectively keep itself in control of the galaxy by maintaining control over the galactic fuel supply, such as through its continued rule over Bespin. Mon Mothma and Leia Organa further suspected the Empire would attempt to take over vital resources&mdash;whether they be food, fuel, or building materials&mdash;in order to keep itself in control of the galaxy.

===Communications and media===
====Overview====

thumb|200px|COMPNOR-approved propaganda poster by Resinu Santhe-Caltra
Acquiring much of the galactic communications systems from the former Galactic Republic, the Empire nationalized the HoloNet News and its galaxy-spanning broadcasts and hyperspace-powered communication systems. The new Imperial Holovision was overseen by the Ministry of Information, who in tandem with the Imperial Press Corps, ensured reporting stayed in line with "acceptable" news coverage and government policy. While the Imperial holoNet was the only state-sanctioned news agency, local news outlets that supported the Galactic Empire were allowed to remain.''Star Wars Rebels: Fight the Empire'' Those that attempted to distribute independent publications could be imprisoned without term. It was also law that the Imperial HoloNet be broadcast at all times in every drinking establishment.

As expected, the galactic HoloNet remained one of the most-viewed news stations in the galaxy, forming public opinion and reporting on pro-Imperial issues and events. When military objectives trumped civilian information, the Empire shut down the local HoloNet in varying sectors, and prioritized HoloNet transmissions to the military, giving Palpatine and his armed forces near-instantaneous communication across the entire galaxy. The Empire even turned leisure activities, such as sports broadcasts, into extensions of its will: the popular grav-ball sport was turned into little more than a recruitment tool for the Empire during its rule. Following the Battle of Endor, the New Republic abolished the Empire's restrictions and censorship on HoloNet and encouraged the creation of several HoloNet channels including the Queen of the Core Network to win over the galactic public after it assumed control by 5 ABY.

====Controlling history====

In order to secure the "unlimited power" he so desperately longed for, Palpatine's empire needed to take control of knowledge through the spread of information and manipulation of how history was taught. For example, in regards to the Jedi Order and its systematic eradication, Palpatine had openly branded the Jedi Order as traitors since the declaration of his regime, and subsequent propaganda spread via the Imperial-controlled HoloNet maintained that image. In a rally held during the first days of the Imperial Era, Grand Vizier Mas Amedda claimed that the Jedi had been behind the "Separatists plots" that had so recently rocked the galaxy, but he promised Palpatine had seen through their lies to deliver the galaxy into a new age of freedom. Imperial propaganda painted the Jedi as traitors who had subverted democracy, disrupted peace, and caused the Clone Wars with their strange abilities in an effort to usurp control of the galaxy for themselves. The aim of the Empire was to purge the Jedi from the memories and thoughts of its citizens beyond just wiping out its remaining members.

thumb|left|300px|Madelin Sun reflects on the Galactic Empire's manipulation and corruption of history.
As noted by Lyra Erso, the Jedi seemed to vanish from galactic memory and enter myth over the course of a few weeks, with very little grief towards the people who had once protected the Republic. The historian Madelin Sun believed that the Empire's successful suppression of the Jedi was an example of its rule by fear. As she reasoned, beyond Palpatine preying on peoples' fears by claiming the Jedi were traitors who had started the war, the Jedi Order appeared to embody their best selves, which reminded the galaxy at large that they were not their own best selves: for how much people loved the Jedi at one time, they also hated the Jedi for reminding them of that. Sun also believed that the Empire exploited its willingness to kill, imprison its citizens, and deploy its massive military in the campaign to eradicate the Jedi from memory. By simply passing laws to outlaw the Jedi, help the Jedi, use the Force, or even know about it, the Empire generated a fear of implied force in its population. After wiping out those who were willing to die for their beliefs, those who survived were people who, in their fear, just wanted to get by and so would not pass down knowledge of the Jedi. To Sun, the Jedi were not "forgotten" but instead became a de facto thought crime punishable by death. With no one willing to speak of the Jedi, knowledge of the Order largely died off in a generation. With the Order's reputation ruined and existence all but covered up as a thought crime, the Empire was able to reshape history by altering documents and how history was taught, reshaping history itself to its designs and leaving the Jedi to be regarded as "outlaws" who were supposedly small in number.

Palpatine also claimed the Jedi Temple as the Imperial Palace, transforming a once-major Jedi building into a symbol of the Empire and claiming control of the Jedi Archives, whose contents could have challenged anti-Jedi propaganda. As per Palpatine's claims in the Proclamation of the New Order, the Empire's initial history of the Clone Wars held that Jedi "mystics" launched a coup and attacked Palpatine, only to be defeated. Their conspiracy, according to the propagandized history, forced Palpatine to transform the Republic into the Empire. However, younger Imperials were taught a version of history that minimized the role of the Jedi, painting them as relics of a bygone time and a small-scale cult during the Republic's final years. One Imperial citizen who grew up with that version of the story, Yrica Quell, sometimes heard the prior claims from older Imperial officers, creating confusion in her mind because she had been raised on the idea the Jedi were much less important. The history taught to Quell also claimed that Palpatine promised to create a better future out of a corrupt, decayed republic, with Quell believing he had succeeded; according to the history she was taught, there was a reduction of petty crime and corporate influence in the wake of Palpatine's rise to power, with local governments also forced into the Imperial hierarchy if they hurt or failed their populous. However, even Quell heard people say Palpatine had been militarizing the Republic to grab power, with everything that came in its wake a mere side effect of his personal ambition.

Indeed, different forms of Imperial propaganda could contradict each other; beyond the example of trying to limit the Jedi Order's role in history, some narratives painted the Jedi as the creators of the Confederacy of Independent Systems&mdash;having used the supposedly "former" Jedi Dooku to form the Separatist state&mdash;as part of their supposed coup to overthrow the Republic, whereas other Imperial claims separated the Jedi and CIS, depicting the Jedi as merely using the war to grab at power and turning Dooku into a lone figure who acted out of "craven ambition." Even still, Dooku's known status as a former Jedi helped to sell the image that the entire Order could have betrayed the Republic. While the idea that the Jedi had created the Clone Wars was a central and foundational piece of Imperial propaganda, some citizens expressed a hate for the Jedi on the belief that the Order had failed to prevent or effectively the win the war. Nonetheless, their cries of hatred had the same result as those who believed in the story of Jedi betrayal.

===Science and technology===

thumb|300px|right|The Death Star was one of the Empire's greatest engineering projects.
One of the Empire's most ambitious scientific developments was the Death Star, a moon-sized, deep-space mobile battle station designed to fire a single planet-destroying superlaser powered by massive kyber crystals and built in orbit of Geonosis. Started by the Galactic Republic during the Clone Wars and continued under the leadership of Krennic, who oversaw the Imperial Military Department of Advanced Weapons Research, which was responsible for the completion of the long-delayed project, this was supported by a complex logistical network of bases.

The Empire was also believed to have created many other superweapons, such as the ''Onager''-class Star Destroyer, a type of capital ship that utilized a kyber-crystal superweapon; the Mass Shadow Generator, which was rumored to exist in realspace and hyperspace; the Torpedo Sphere, a siege platform and space station; or the rumored Asteroid Dreadnought, which was camouflaged as space rock; the Omega Frost, an interstellar freeze ray; and the Electro-Proton Bomb/Defoliator, which was based on the Republic's electro-proton bomb from the Clone Wars.''Star Wars: The Rebel Files'' The Dark trooper program, deemed a failure, led to the Empire's disillusionment with battle droids.

Operation: Cinder oversaw the use of climate disruption arrays, which were satellites modified to provoke storms once the beam reached through the planet.

Experimental starships including the TIE/IN interceptor and TIE/D Defender pushed the Empire's technical capabilities, and introduced concepts and technology that would be reincorporated in future ship designs throughout the New Republic Era.''Star Wars: The Last Jedi: Incredible Cross-Sections''

A group of ''Sith scientists'' used alchemy and science to develop Project Blackwing, to achieve immortality, with the project being based out of a secret research facility on Dandoran. However, the project went awry when a virus known as "the Sickness" was accidentally created and killed its hosts, turning their bodies into intelligent cannibalistic zombies known as Undead Troopers.''Star Wars: Commander'' Imperial scientists working on Project Celestial Power also tried to contain dark-matter quintessence.

The Emperor himself had planned to further push the boundaries of what could be accomplished without the Force, creating cybernetically enhanced supersoldiers under the development of Doctor Cylo at his heavily guarded research base. Owing to Vader's failure to protect both the first Death Star and Weapons Factory Alpha, Palpatine planned to eventually form an army of cybernetic soldiers as his primary enforcers, reducing Vader's position as apprentice to a mere ceremonial role.

The Imperial Mining Institute also existed under the New Order, while the Imperial Department of Military Research helped boost the combat forces of the Empire, developing the widely used stormtrooper armor and the IT-O Interrogation Unit, along with the 9D9-s54 Dianoga spy droid. The Empire also initiated Project Harvester, a clandestine operation designed to root out children with Force sensitivity and detain them at an underground facility connected to the Arkanis Academy, located on the Outer Rim world of Arkanis.''Servants of the Empire: Rebel in the Ranks''

==Society and culture==
===Overview===

The transition from the Republic to the Empire was also marked by major changes in the new government's architectural aesthetic. While the democratic government favored sweeping lines in its architecture, Palpatine's authoritarian regime preferred bold and brutalist designs. Palpatine himself enjoyed the look of such architecture due to the brutal nature it embodied.''Darth Vader'' (2017) 21 This brutalist style first emerged before the foundation of the Empire during the Clone Wars, when the architect Orson Krennic transformed the municipal grounds on Coruscant into military command centers. A prime example of Krennic's work was the Republic Center for Military Operations.

Meanwhile, the ISB Central Office on Coruscant broke from the trend of darky colored Imperial installations with white conference rooms and hallways, possibly reflecting a degree of "ideological purity." Grav-ball was a popular sport within the Galactic Empire, with many worlds hosting teams that occasionally competed with one another. Underground gladiatorial games existed within Imperial territories, the Outer Rim Carve-up and Stormblade Bloodfest being some of the organized occurrences of the sport within the early years of the Empire.

Humanocentric single-species domination was not coincidental, but intended under the High Human cultural model. Imperial propaganda actively supported state-sponsored ethnocentric xenophobia and fear-mongering. To the Empire, "aliens" were by and large unwelcome within its order, with aliens being seen as "different" and "strange." As such, the Empire treated nonhuman segments of its populations as serfs, slaves, or obstacles needing to be tamed, removed, or ignored. The Empire supported the idea that aliens were untrustworthy&mdash;unlike humans&mdash;and behind their veneer of innocence lurked a vicious monster. The Imperial propaganda machine was so effective in its message that even near-human species exhibited an inherent distrust towards nonhuman populations. Since the Empire looked down on aliens, it was rare for aliens to serve as Imperial officers. Nevertheless, some nonhumans were known to occupy lofty roles within the Empire, such as the Chagrian Mas Amedda, who served as the Empire's Grand Vizier, the Imperial Grand Admiral Thrawn, and the Pau'an Grand Inquisitor, the leading figure in the Inquisitorius during the Age of the Empire.

Still, Thrawn noticed that he faced adversity due to his non-human origins and the fact that he was not linked to a major political family.''Thrawn: Alliances'' One of the main origins of the anti-alien belief was that during the Clone Wars most of the separatist leaders were aliens from sectors far from the Core Worlds. That made the humans distrustful of the other species of the galaxy during the Imperial Era. In addition to state-sponsored discrimination against a predominantly nonhuman galaxy, the Empire discouraged the learning of alien languages and cultures such as Ithorese in an effort to destroy foreign cultures, and sought to impose high "Imperial standards" for its citizens. The destructive nature of the Clone Wars and use of droid armies by the Separatist Alliance fostered and expounded anti-droid bigotry so well into the galactic psyche that it would endure well into the Imperial Era.

The Empire saw droids as servants and tools, to be discarded and thrown away when no longer useful. The Galactic Empire was not only xenophobic towards the alien species of the galaxy, but some Imperial officers displayed similar sentiment towards human groups whom they deemed to be of lesser social standing. Some human Imperial officers, especially those from the Core Worlds, displayed disrespect towards humans who hailed from regions like Wild Space and the Outer Rim, including Lothal. The Empire also turned against the Mandalorians, who rejected Imperial leadership and thus were targeted for extermination. The clones of the planet Kamino also began to be discriminated against by the Empire after they were seen as relics of the Old Republic that were no longer useful and could be discarded, causing many ex-clone soldiers to become unemployed.

The Imperial education system emphasized science through initiatives for the youth. Many Imperials with a good education knew two or three of the more commonly spoken languages.''Battlefront II: Inferno Squad''

===Demographics===

As a pan-galactic Empire, the Empire was home to countless alien species across the galaxy. In terms of preference, the population of the Empire was dominated largely by humans, a species native to the Imperial capital world Coruscant. Humans were the most common species in both the Imperial Military and the Empire's political circles, with the highest echelons of the New Order almost entirely consisting of the species.''Star Wars Rebels: Visual Guide: Epic Battles''

To increase the human population and military manpower, several Imperial breeding programs were enacted in the early days of the Empire. They encouraged people to start and grow families, and rewarded them for it. While the Empire supported traditional heterosexual relationships, it did not care about the individual sexual preferences of its citizens, provided that such individuals kept their affairs behind closed doors, and did not interfere with any of its family programs.

As a human-dominated government, the Galactic Empire supported Galactic Basic Standard and its Aurebesh/High Galactic writing system. Learning of foreign languages and cultures for the general populace was disapproved of.

Officially, all organized religion and belief in the supernatural was outlawed. In reality, the vast size and scope of the Empire meant that thousands of religions were practiced across its vast territory. The Seswenna sector alone had over three hundred distinct religions with active practitioners, all officially recognized by the local Imperial administrator. Chief of the Imperial Navy Conan Antonio Motti himself claimed to be a "man of faith," and believed that Imperial unity could only be strengthened through cooperative and constructive dialogue among citizens following diverse spiritual traditions. Underground religions surrounding the extinct Jedi such as the Church of the Force and the Guardians of the Whills continued to exist despite their perilous closeness to the Jedi of old.

===Slavery===

The Empire's rise saw the gradual repeal of Republic anti-slavery laws. Species such as the Wookiees were declared non-sentient. Subsequently much of the Imperial war machine was built on the shoulders of the enslaved Wookiee population, who saw their homeworld of Kashyyyk ecologically devastated.

Within the Empire, non-humans were routinely subjugated, with many sent to numerous slave-labor camps across the galaxy, one of the most infamous being the spice mines of Kessel, where Wookiee slaves, prized for their strength, were sent to mine the valuable spice located in the planet's interior. It was a literal death sentence for many, with an expected survival time of three months. Humanoid species often survived longer, ranging from one to two years in the mines.

Abusive and exploitative, the Empire forcibly relocated settlers and pressed them into Imperial factory work. Resisting could see one's family kidnapped and killed. Unemployment in strategic resource systems was declared unlawful. On Ryloth, isolated settlements often existed with little or no knowledge about the Empire at large, with those same camps oftentimes being disbanded and their inhabitants relocated to slave-labor camps when needed. Escaped slaves or displaced persons often made up these camps, similar to Tarkintown on Lothal. Those that resisted Imperial rule could see their whole planet devastated and species reduced to near-extinction, such as the reptilian Bodach'i, who were forced to work in spice mines on planets such as Kerev Doi.

==Astrography==
===Administrative divisions===

While the Empire utilized the senators of the Imperial Senate to maintain control of their respective systems, control was gradually given over to Imperial sector and planetary governors, or Moffs. Grand Moffs were charged with overseeing control of oversectors, which comprised numerous sectors, and the Imperial Navy was organized into sector fleets. Rather than direct annexation, many of the Empire's territories were controlled through puppet states, alliances, and protectorates, most notably the Corporate Sector.

The local governing bodies that were in the Imperial Senate, to which had autonomy were downgraded to a mostly ceremonial and powerless role, as were the senators they sent, who all served under a Moff's oversight.

On the border of the Mid Rim and Outer Rim Territories, an invisible boundary was considered the "front line" against the lawlessness of the Outer Rim. The Imperial sphere of influence ended shortly before reaching Hutt Space, resulting in its reputation as a haven for smugglers, bounty hunters and other denizens of the galaxy.

The Empire also maintained strategic resource systems, in which industrial surveillance, heightened security measures and higher work quotas were in effect, and were often placed under the supervision of influential barons, moguls and efficiency experts.

===Early holdings and expansionism===

As the successor state to the Galactic Republic, the Galactic Empire's authority spanned most of the known galaxy, with the Core Worlds housing some of the richest and most affluent planets in the Empire, with gradual economic decline and lawlessness appearing the further one ventured from the Core. While the Emperor planned to claim the Outer Rim, the logistical complexities of such a feat soon became apparent. Many of the exoplanets were too rough, wild, or strange to ever be brought under Imperial yoke. Thus, many were relegated to hold meager garrisons or host temporary military excursions. As a result, exploitation, weapons testing and military installations dotted the Outer Systems, while Imperials often came for the drinking, smoking, gambling, or black-market goods.

Located in the Galactic Empire was the extragalactic holding of Kamino, which was in a star system that straggled south of the Rishi Maze satellite galaxy and beyond the larger galaxy. Early into its reign, the Empire expanded into the Outer Rim, creating a presence that was far greater than what former Padawan Ahsoka Tano had expected; after fleeing from the suddenly occupied small moon of Raada, which the Imperials had taken over in order to exploit its farmland, she found that every star system she passed through had been taken over, with a controlling Imperial presence installed in each. As Tano observed, such Imperial holdings were not merely bases constructed to look over local governments, but oppressive extensions of the Empire, controlling the local resources and populations without any concern for their needs nor personal rights. A devout Imperial, meanwhile, would allege the Empire improved every star system it entered with&mdash;as "the Client" put it&mdash;trade, safety, prosperity, and "peace." However, large scale Imperial peace came at the cost of one's personal freedoms and said "secruity" depended greatly on punishing whatever it was that the Empire deemed to be "wrong."

Seeking the source of the dark side, the Empire established numerous labs and communications stations on distant moons and asteroids beyond known space, with Emperor Palpatine believing his power was drawn from beyond the galaxy. The Imperial Survey Corps helped Palpatine chart the unexplored regions of the galaxy.''Adventures in Wild Space: The Escape'' Palpatine maintained relations with the Chiss Ascendancy, a regional power located within the Unknown Regions through its ambassador, Mitth'raw'nuruodo, better known as Thrawn. Palpatine accepted Thrawn as his adviser on matters involving the Unknown Regions, and hoped they would both fight potential future threats from the Unknown Regions.

===Retreat and collapse===

Following the Battle of Endor, the Galactic Empire steadily began to shrink, losing numerous worlds to the recently formed New Republic, with Imperial assets and academies on worlds such as Uyter destroyed in bloody warfare. With its losses and failures, the Empire retreated to numerous fallback positions on strategically unimportant worlds such as Naalol, often drawing the New Republic into long and indecisive conflicts, forestalling its slow push toward the Core Worlds. Despite these efforts, the Republic had already established its capital on Chandrila, a planet located within the Core. The Empire made three successive sieges to retake the Mid Rim world of Naboo, birthplace of Palpatine and thus an influential rallying point for the Empire's shattered forces, but failed.

A few months after Endor, the Imperial Future Council met on Akiva, a planet in a sector of the Outer Rim still under Imperial control. Roughly two months after the Battle on Akiva, the Galactic Empire's territorial possessions were rapidly shrinking and described as a "patchwork quilt" by Grand Admiral Rae Sloane. Numerous systems left the Empire or waged their own resistance movements, declared their independence, and established their own fiefdoms or joined the New Republic. Criminal syndicates flourished in this atmosphere of conflict, especially the reptilian pirate Eleodie Maracavanya, who had captured the Super Star Destroyer ''Annihilator'' and used it to forge her own criminal empire. Various moffs and governors rebelled against the Empire, while more and more people asked what exactly the Empire ''was''. Agencies, personnel, and whole planetary systems started to drift apart, each adopting differing tactics and methods for combating the New Republic, and each other.

By this time, the Empire had already lost numerous systems to the New Republic's lighting-fast strikes, and factionalism had begun to scar any attempts to reclaim lost territories. The New Republic had already made headway into the Core Worlds. The last sector of the Outer Rim under Imperial control was a thin region of space known as the Exterior, along with the planets Zhadalene, Korrus, and Belladoon. With the shipyards of Kuat, Xa Fel, Anadeen, and Turco Prime having already been lost or contested, Rax planned to use the Empire's last foothold in the Outer Rim as a "strangling cord" to tie around the New Republic. While the Chandrila terror attack demoralized the New Republic, it failed to turn the tide of the war against the Empire, which soon after lost Kashyyyk following an uprising led by Han Solo and Chewbacca.

After their defeat at Jakku and the signing of the Galactic Concordance, some Imperial warships began jumping into the Unknown Regions to escape the prying eyes of the New Republic. This was made easier since parts of the Unknown Regions had previously been explored by military scout ships surveying star systems and blazing hyperspace routes known only to a select few.

==Behind the scenes==
===Development===
The Galactic Empire first appeared as the main antagonist of the first ''Star Wars'' movie, ''Star Wars'': Episode IV ''A New Hope'', in 1977, where it was named the "evil Galactic Empire" in the opening crawl. The Empire's origins and role in the ''Star Wars'' universe were subsequently expanded by various Expanded Universe literature and media over the next four decades. Following the Lucasfilm Story Group's decision in May 2014 to reboot the ''Star Wars'' universe. Financial engineering professor Zachary Feinstein calculated that the hypothetical GDP of the Galactic Empire would be 4.6 sextillion per year.

According to the author Jason Fry, the Galactic Empire in the newly established canonical universe was not openly xenophobic and misogynistic, unlike the Legends version. However, he acknowledged that some of the Empire's most devoted supporters were xenophobes, like his character Janus Fhurek, a minor antagonist in his 2014 junior novel ''Servants of the Empire: Edge of the Galaxy''. In his view, the presence of prominent Imperial female characters in John Jackson Miller's novel ''A New Dawn'' and ''Star Wars Rebels'' precluded the idea of a misogynistic Empire. Pro-human xenophobia within the Imperial Military, government bureaucracy, and society has since been confirmed in reference guides like ''Star Wars Rebels: The Visual Guide'' and ''Star Wars Rebels: Visual Guide: Epic Battles'', and novels like ''Thrawn''. ''Thrawn'' clarified that Imperials were not officially allowed to disrespect non-humans, with General Orders to Imperial cadets outlining that, but Imperials did so all the same. Canonical sources ultimately confirmed that human superiority was an intentional push from the Empire under the High Human cultural model. ''Star Wars: The Rise and Fall of the Galactic Empire'' went onto suggest that misogyny did exist within the Empire as well.

===Inspirations===
The Republic's transformation into the Empire is perhaps modeled after the transformation of the Roman Republic into the Roman Empire; the Roman Republic was transformed because of war, infighting, and two of its leaders, Julius and Augustus Caesar. Other reasons for the transition were based on the transformation of the First French Republic into the French Empire by Napoleon (after a coup), and the Weimar Republic into the Third Reich. Lucas, during the 2005 Cannes film festival, implied that the similarities between these historical elements, and to a lesser extent America's fighting in the 2003 Iraq War, were deliberate as part of Lucas' philosophy that democracies tend to be turned into dictatorships at the people's willing support, a philosophy that he implied had stemmed from American involvement in the Vietnam War.

Similar to the Soviet Union under Stalin (specifically the aftermath of Stalin's death), as soon as Palpatine met his first demise at the Battle of Endor, various insergencies throughout the Empire were attempted before being put down by the Imperials. One insergency in particular, the Coruscant Uprising, had notable similarities to the Hungarian Revolution of 1956 that commenced shortly after Stalin's death. On a related note, series creator George Lucas cited that Emperor Palpatine's arrival on the Death Star in ''Return of the Jedi'' was based of the military parades in "May Day" in what was at the time Soviet Russia. George Lucas, however, indicated in ''The Making of Star Wars: The Definitive Story Behind the Original Film'', ''The Making of Return of the Jedi'', the ''Revenge of the Sith'' commentary, as well as the Empire of Dreams and the Cannes Festival showing of ''Revenge of the Sith'' that the Galactic Empire was primarily based in part on the American forces during the Vietnam War, when citing that the Ewoks and Rebel Alliance were based on the Viet Cong and also claiming his primary
inspiration for the Empire's ruler, Palpatine, was then-president Nixon, and also implied in ''The Making of Star Wars'' that the Empire was essentially American in 1983 (ten years after he started writing the drafts for ''Star Wars'') where "Nixonian gangsters" assassinated the Emperor and used a rigged election to obtain power as well as exploited various groups to maintain power as deliberately letting crime escalate to such an extent that people would welcome a total control police state.''The Making of Star Wars'', pages 7-8; 17"I started to work on Star Wars rather then continue Apocalypse Now. I had worked on Apocalypse Now for about four years and I had very strong feelings about it. I wanted to do it, but could not get it off the ground... A lot of my interest in Apocalypse Now was carried over into Star Wars. I figured I couldn't make that film because it was about the Vietnam War, so I would essentially deal with some of the same interesting concepts that I was going to use and convert them into space fantasy, so you'd have essentially a large technological empire going after a small group of freedom fighters or human beings [...] a small independent country like North Vietnam threatened by a neighbor or provincial rebellion, instigated by gangsters aided by empire. [...] The Empire is like America ten years from now, after Nixonian gangsters assassinated the Emperor and were elevated to power in a rigged election; created civil disorder by instigating race riots aiding rebel groups and allowing the crime rate to rise to the point where a 'total control' police state was welcomed by the people. Then the people were exploited with high taxes, utility and transport costs. Gangsters, a cartel made up of power companies, transport companies & crime organizations. Other companies had to pay bribes to stay in business.They increased the crime rate by slowing down the system of justice and punishment."

Lucas himself was quoted in a interview conducted in 2005 at Skywalker Ranch that: "It was really about the Vietnam War, and that was the period where Nixon was trying to run for a [second] term, which got me to thinking historically about how do democracies get turned into dictatorships? Because the democracies aren't overthrown; they're given away." He further opined in the interview that "no matter who you look at in history, the story is always the same, that's what's eerie. It was a little eerie that things have developed the way they have." He also had envisioned the Empire as being based on Vietnam War-ere America (and by extension, the Rebel Alliance being based on the Viet Cong) as early as when he penned the storyline back in 1973, in part due to Star Wars itself being a continuation of a thematic trilogy decrying American involvement in Vietnam, claiming that his intended story draft when pitching it that the story was about "a technological empire going after a small band of freedom fighters," which had stemmed from his role in the development of the film ''Apocalypse Now'' earlier.''The Making of Star Wars'' "A lot of my [George Lucas's] interest in Apocalypse Now was carried over into ''Star Wars'', I figured that I couldn't make that film because it was about the Vietnam War, so I would essentially deal with some of the same interesting concepts that I was going to use and convert them into space fantasy, so you'd have essentially a large technological empire going after a small group of freedom fighters or human beings." In an interview for TIME magazine regarding the then-upcoming Star Wars: Episode II Attack of the Clones regarding the connection of the Empire and the Republic, Lucas also implied that, besides Nixon, another influence on the Empire had been the Kennedy family.

===Non-canon history===
====Star Wars: Visions Volume 1====

thumb|right|300px|The TRIGGER Empire's forces
The Galactic Empire was featured in several short films as part of the first volume of ''Star Wars: Visions'',''Star Wars: Visions'' Volume 1 released on September 22, 2021. In "THE TWINS," the TRIGGER Empire appeared as a remnant of the Galactic Empire and First Order, led by the Dark Lord sibling clones Am and Karre. T-Stormtroopers made up the remnant's military. The T-Empire created the Gemini-class Star Destroyer, equipped with a hyper cannon powered by a kyber crystal that could destroy several star systems. The plot was foiled by Karre when he stole the kyber crystal and defeated his sister, destroying the Star Destroyer.

In "T0-B1," an Imperial Star Destroyer received a transmission from the droid T0-B1, who was trained by the Jedi Master Mitaka. An Inquisitor traveled to the Jedi's planet and killed the master but was defeated by T0-B1 soon after. In "Lop & Ochō," the Empire occupied the planet Tao and was in control of a base on the surface. The Yasaburō clan opposed the Imperial presence, the leader Yasaburō leading an attack on the base. Yasaburō's biological daughter Ochō believed that the Empire was important for Tao's survival and joined their forces, being recruited by an admiral of the Imperial Security Bureau. Yasaburō's adopted daughter fought Ochō and defeated her, forcing a retreat.

====Star Wars: Visions Volume 2====

thumb|left|300px|The Empire poisoned the planet Selk with its factory.
The Empire appeared in multiple short films of the ''Star Wars: Visions'' second volume as well,''Star Wars: Visions'' Volume 2 being released on May 4, 2023. In "In the Stars," the Galactic Empire occupied the planet Selk, building a factory that poisoned the planet's oceans. The native sentient species of the world attempted to fight back against the Imperial forces, but were swiftly defeated by the Empire's superior weaponry, leaving the sisters Koten and Tichina as the sole survivors. The sisters eventually attacked and destroyed the factory, breathing life back into the planet.

In "The Spy Dancer," the planet B-bel was attacked by the Empire and a child of the alien Loi'e was kidnapped by an Imperial officer. Years later, Loi'e owned Loi'e's Follies, where several individuals performed for the Empire's forces and secretly assisted the Rebel Alliance. During a performance, Loi'e's son arrived at the cabaret with his KX-security droid and mistaking him for the man who kidnapped him, Loi'e attacked her son. The Imperial forces opened fire on Loi'e, but she was able to speak to her son and left him a hologram of himself as an infant. The performers escaped the cabaret before it was destroyed.

==Appearances==

===Non-canon appearances===

==Sources==

===Non-canon sources===
*''LEGO Star Wars: Build Your Own Adventure''
*
*''The Art of Star Wars: Visions''

==Notes and references==

==External links==
*

Category:Enslaver organizations
Category:Galactic Empire
Category:Galactic governments