
'''Hoth''' was a remote, icy planet that was the sixth planet in the star system of the same name, located in the Anoat sector of the galaxy's Outer Rim Territories. It was the homeworld to the primitive wampa species.

It notably hosted Echo Base during the Galactic Civil War, the temporary headquarters of the Alliance to Restore the Republic, until the Galactic Empire located them, initiating a major confrontation known as the Battle of Hoth. In the months following, scavengers established temporary base camps on the planet to scrap the AT-ATs destroyed.

In the months after the Battle of Endor, rumors emerged about the New Republic intending to repurpose Hoth into a prison for those who remained loyal to the Empire, however, the credibility of the rumors were dismissed as Chancellor Mon Mothma had been dedicated to a pretext of justice over punishment. Meanwhile, the war returned to Hoth, where it became the site of another battle during the Iron Blockade.

==Description==

thumb|left|250px|Imperial AT-ATs traverse the frozen landscape on Hoth.
From space, the planet of Hoth looked like a pale blue orb due to its dense snow and ice covering. Five planets existed between Hoth and its sun, while an asteroid belt surrounded the planet with meteors occasionally striking the surface. Most of its surface was covered with glaciers and frozen ice plains. Despite the characterization of Hoth as being a planet of frozen tundras and nothing more, a characterization the naturalist Kell Tolkani said would be fair if someone only viewed the world from orbit, another third of the planet was covered by oceans.''Star Wars: Complete Locations''

The temperature, although always frigid, was known to drop to -60°C come nightfall. Although devoid of intelligent life, Hoth was home to fifteen subspecies of tauntauns, which were commonly used by Rebels as a means of transport, and which Han Solo cut open to use as shelter to keep Luke Skywalker and himself warm during a snowstorm. It was also home to a species of towering predators known as wampas. During his stay on Hoth, Skywalker was captured by a wampa and was hung upside down in the wampa's cave, waiting to be eaten. Using the power of the Force, Skywalker managed to get his hands on his lightsaber and cut himself down from the roof and sever the wampa's right arm. The planet also had a number of "crystalline geysers."

==History==
===The Rebel Alliance===

By the time of the Galactic Civil War between the Galactic Empire and the Alliance to Restore the Republic, Hoth was undergoing an ice age. Various smuggling rings tried to make use of Hoth as a base, yet their efforts always failed due to the planet's extreme conditions.''Star Wars: Battles that Changed the Galaxy'' Sometime following the Battle of Yavin, Saponza's Gang, itself a rebel cell, established a base on Hoth. Hoth was first surveyed for use as a rebel base by Corporal Purpruff.''Star Wars: The Rebel Files'' Jan Dodonna, a general in the Alliance to Restore the Republic,''Star Wars'' (2015) 55 listed Hoth among his preliminary scans for possible Alliance bases. With Hoth a world so obscure it was not on most star maps despite being extremely close to the Corellian Trade Spine, it looked to be a perfect spot for a rebel base. Indeed, its surface was a winter wasteland, Hoth sat on a lesser used hyperlane, and the asteroid field around Hoth provided an extra degree of protection. That field hampered travel through the Hoth system, and any asteroid crash into the surface would create enough of a thermal signature that it hid signs of intelligent life.

In 1 ABY, states that Hoth was chosen as the rebel base one year after the events of ''Star Wars'': Episode IV ''A New Hope''. As ''Star Wars: Galactic Atlas'' states that ''A New Hope'' ends in 0 ABY, Hoth must have been chosen as the base in 1 ABY. with more resources at their command than the various smuggling rings that had failed to turn Hoth into a headquarters, Hoth was chosen by the rebels as the location for their base of operations. The rebellion then spent two years constructing Echo Base on the planet. With the Alliance's resources at their disposal, rebel engineers worked on expanding ice caverns into a base over those two years. Around 2 ABY,''Star Wars: Timelines'' after Dodonna was killed in the Battle of Mako-Ta, Mon Mothma gave his list of possible bases to Leia Organa after the mission to Shu-Torun, requesting that her team scout the locations. Han Solo expressed surprise at how obscure the locations were. However, Luke Skywalker responded to him by saying that one of the locations was the Rebellion's new home.

===Battle of Hoth and aftermath===

thumb|right|250px|AT-ATs engage the rebel defense of Hoth.
Hoth was the arena of a battle between the Galactic Empire and the Rebel Alliance, which had installed its temporary headquarters, Echo Base, on the ice planet. However, thanks to one of the thousands of probe droids they had dispatched throughout the galaxy, the Imperials had discovered the Alliance base within a month of the Rebels' habitation on the planet.''Lost Stars'' Although Echo Base was evacuated in the eleventh hour, the Battle of Hoth resulted in a clear defeat for the Alliance after the elite Imperial Blizzard Force overran it.

In the months following the Battle of Hoth, scavengers established temporary base camps on the planet to scrap the AT-ATs destroyed by the Rebel Alliance during the Empire's attack. Following the Battle of Endor, Hoth became the site of another battle, occurring during the Iron Blockade imposed upon the Anoat sector.''Star Wars: Uprising''

===New Republic Era===

In 5 ABY, states that the events of ''Shadow Fall: An Alphabet Squadron Novel'' are set approximately half a year after the Battle of Endor. ''Before the Awakening'' states that Kes Dameron and Shara Bey moved to Yavin 4 around six months after the Battle of Endor, which ''Star Wars: Galactic Atlas'' establishes to be in 5 ABY. Therefore, the events of ''Shadow Fall'' must also take place around that year. Troithe Acting Governor Fara Yadeez heard rumors that the New Republic intended to repurpose Hoth into a prison for those who remained loyal to the Empire. Major Soran Keize, however, dismissed the credibility of the rumor as Republic Chancellor Mon Mothma had been dedicated to a pretext of justice over punishment, and that repurposing Hoth, where the Rebellion had been badly defeated by the Empire, had too much poetry.''Shadow Fall: An Alphabet Squadron Novel''

By the New Republic Era, Hoth returned to obscurity, the battlefields being picked apart and long-abandoned. It was mentioned in the ''Galactic Explorer's Guide'', a survival guide written by Hondo Ohnaka and DK-RA-43, where it was described as a "footnote" in galactic history.''Star Wars: The Galactic Explorer's Guide''

==Behind the scenes==
thumb|right|250px|Concept art of Hoth by Ralph McQuarrie.
Hoth first appeared in the 1980 film ''Star Wars'': Episode V ''The Empire Strikes Back'', the second installment of the ''Star Wars'' original trilogy. The real-world filming location for Hoth was Finse, Norway.''Star Wars: The Skywalker Saga'' – The Official Collector's Edition The scenes of Luke Skywalker stumbling through the snow were filmed a few feet outside the crew's hotel.''Star Wars in 100 Scenes''

Hoth appears in "Reflections," a short film with unconfirmed canonicity."Reflections" In between 25 ABY and 34 ABY,''Star Wars: Timelines'' dates the events of ''Phasma'' to 34 ABY. As Phasma's armor is created in a chapter set nine years before the present day events, it must have been forged in 25 ABY. Furthermore, Phasma dies during the events of , which ''Star Wars: Timelines'' dates to 34 ABY. As Phasma appears alive and in her armor in "Reflections," it must occur between those two years. the First Order had a presence on Hoth, but assignment to Hoth was considered a punishment. During that time, two First Order stormtroopers were reassigned to Hoth by an angered Captain Phasma, who had overheard one of the troopers tell the other that whomever was in command of their prior facility should be reassigned to Hoth for their failings. Upon finding themselves on Hoth, the first trooper attempted to find comfort in finally blending into an environment, only for a wampa to roar in the distance.

==Appearances==

===Non-canon appearances===

==Sources==

===Non-canon sources===
*''LEGO Star Wars: Choose Your Side: Doodle Activity Book''
*''LEGO Star Wars: Build Your Own Adventure''
*''LEGO Star Wars'' 55
*''LEGO Star Wars'' 61
*''LEGO Star Wars Yoda's Galaxy Atlas''
*''LEGO Star Wars'' 79
*
*

==Notes and references==

==External links==
*
*
*

Category:Alliance to Restore the Republic planets
Category:Hoth system locations
Category:Ice planets
Category:Planets in the Outer Rim Territories
Category:Planets in the Western Reaches