
The '''TIE/ln space superiority starfighter''', also called the '''TIE/ln''' or simply the '''TIE fighter''', was the signature starfighter of the Galactic Empire and symbol of its space superiority. Instantly recognizable from the roar of its engines as well as its unique design, the TIE/ln exuded Imperial power and prestige across the galaxy, seeing use throughout the Empire's reign. They were nicknamed '''Evil-Eyes''' or '''Eye-balls'''''Alphabet Squadron'' by members of the New Republic.

==Characteristics==

thumb|left|250px|Technical drawing of a TIE/ln starfighter
The TIE/ln starfighter was a small, short-range fighter developed, manufactured, and mass produced by Sienar Fleet Systems (SFS). Developed by SFS company head Raith Sienar, the basis for the TIE fighter could be traced back to Kuat Systems Engineering's Alpha-3 Nimbus starfighter, along with several other outmoded models from the Old Republic. Like their predecessors, TIE's employed two vertical wings similar in appearance to V-wing starfighters; however, the Eta-2 ''Actis''-class light interceptor bore even more similarities with its central cockpit pod, twin ion engines, and common weapons technology. Its official production name was the '''Twin Ion Engine "line edition" space superiority starfighter'''.

The fighter's name is derived from its propulsion system, which was specifically designed to create a distinct noise so as to inspire fear in those who opposed the Empire. These were originally two P-s3 ion engines, which would be replaced by twin P-s4 ion engines by approximately 14 BBY. These engines could expel charged particles along almost any vector, providing the TIE fighter with incredible maneuverability, and their lack of moving parts or high-temperature components made them easier to maintain: Imperial records indicated less than five percent of all TIE fighters lost were as a result of field attrition. Fuel for the engines consisted of a radioactive gas kept in pressurized fuel tankage located on the underside of the cockpit.''Star Wars Complete Vehicles, New Edition''

A TIE fighter's twin ion engines, combined with W-401 maneuvering jets, provided thrust and boosters capable of quickly adjusting the ship's direction. The TIE/ln featured vertical takeoff and landing (VTOL) capabilities owing to repulsorlift cyclers in its wing struts&mdash;reducing its already small mass to negligible weight&mdash;and micropositioning thrusts from the twin ion engines. Furthermore, the lack of a hyperdrive and resultant navigational systems alongside extended life support and fuel combined to cut down the TIE's total mass.

thumb|left|180px|A Rebel T-65B X-wing starfighter in the sights of a TIE fighter's targeting computer
In order to reduce cost, mass and energy consumption while improving maneuverability, the TIE fighter lacked deflector shields. It was armored with quadanium steel plating which was proof against hand-held blasters (except in exposed areas such as the stabilizers) but could be penetrated by direct hits from military-grade laser cannons, heavy blaster cannons, and micrometeor impacts. However the cockpit's spherical shape meant that glancing blows would be deflected away. TIE fighters were equipped with sensor jamming capabilities and could be retrofitted with additional electronic countermeasures.''Star Wars: Squadrons''''Victory's Price: An Alphabet Squadron Novel''

The fighter's black "wings" were in fact an array of twelve solar collectors, framed by rigid quadanium steel foil braces, that featured a micro-crenulated solar absorption surface. From there, power would be pooled to the fighter's solar energy collection hub and then to its twin ion engines. Originally the wings also powered the fighter's armaments, but this was found to quickly drain the fighter of energy and negatively affected its maneuverability. These early fighters were later retrofitted with a dedicated generator to power the lasers, a feature that became standard on all TIE fighters. These wings also served as stabilizers.

The wings were sturdy enough to double as landing gear, further reducing overall mass, however, TIE fighters were designed to be deployed and retrieved using special cycling racks. Standard on Star Destroyers and other Imperial facilities, each rack system had a maximum capacity of 72 fighters. Beyond allowing pilots and technicians to access the craft more easily, the system was also equipped with small tractor beam projectors to assist with landing operations.

One drawback to the wing design was that it did obscure the pilot's field of vision, yet Imperial authorities considered this an acceptable motivation for pilots to concentrate on the targets in front of them. Due to its importance as a stabilizer, if part of the wing were to be removed to increase sight it would cost the fighter stability, which would then hamper the ship's ability to engage in dog fights. The wings did provide some measure of additional protection for the cockpit, and the fighter's sensor array compensated for the blind spots by augmenting and expanding the pilot's visual range.

thumb|left|250px|Imperial TIE fighters
The TIE/ln was first and foremost designed for space combat, and while capable of operating in a planetary atmosphere it was at a distinct disadvantage versus other starfighters like the X-wing. The hexagonal wings made it harder to steer and more vulnerable to crosswinds. If it attempted to reverse its thrust too hard in order to decelerate, the fighter also risked causing severe structural damage to the wing spars and support pylons. However, depending on the circumstances the TIE fighter could still give a good account for itself in atmospheric combat. When operating down in tight urban confines and an oxygen-rich atmosphere for example, a TIE fighter was equal to an X-wing in speed and maneuverability. At higher altitudes it could also successfully engage in dogfights with X-wings at supersonic speeds.''Shadow Fall: An Alphabet Squadron Novel''

The TIE fighter's primary armament was a pair of L-s1 low-temperature laser cannons capable of destroying a Taylander shuttle in a single shot, although by the time of the Battle of Endor these had been replaced with L-s7.2 laser cannons. The green blaster bolt these weapons fired was the result of the more expensive blaster gas used by the Empire and aided pilots in identifying their shots. Mated to the cannons was an advanced T-s8 targeting computer&mdash;later replaced by the T-s9a model&mdash;which was considered superior to the targeting computers on Rebel fighters. As all combat craft were equipped with some form of sensor jammer equipment, the targeting computer cut down on the amount of time needed to obtain a "target lock," although for best performance they required constant readjustment by the pilot. While TIE fighters lacked any secondary weaponry as standard, they could be retrofitted to carry additional armaments such as missiles or replace their normal laser cannons with other models or ion cannons.

Its central cockpit was tightly fitted, incorporating flight controls, viewscreens, targeting systems, tracking equipment&mdash;including a homing beacon in case the vessel was stolen&mdash;and room for a pilot all in the central pod. Despite being designed for a single occupant, several other passengers could fit inside the central cockpit, although the fit would be extremely tight. A pressurized seal allowed the cockpit to retain an atmosphere and minimal, perfunctory oxygen scrubbers to protect the equipment, but the lack of any life support system required pilots to wear special flight suits and vacum-sealed flight helmets. The onboard data recorder, kept within an armored compartment beneath the pilot's seat, was designed to survive any event which would otherwise reduce the TIE fighter to scattered debris to allow for later retrieval and analysis.

Flight controls were considered intuitive and easy to learn, in some cases allowing rebel novices to fly and operate them after having stolen them from Imperial airfields. TIEs were also outfitted with an ejector seat. Equipped with an antigrav unit and automated safety system, the seat was designed to guide the pilot away from debris and prevent any serious injury such as spinal fractures by determining when to release restrains or deploy the parachute. It was also equipped with a locator beacon to aid in pilot recovery.

During the reign of the Empire, TIE fighters were favored for their versatility, if not for their durability. They were able to operate both in space as well as in planetary atmospheres, acting as fighters or scouts.''Star Wars Rebels: Spark of Rebellion'' They were more than capable of enforcing Imperial law against unarmed or lightly defended civilian transports. TIE/ln pilots were not afforded the independence enjoyed by equivalent pilots of the Rebel Alliance, as capital ships were preferred for tactical discussion among the Imperial Starfleet. In Imperial doctrine, individual TIE fighters were used for scouting while a pair of fighters would be used to escort shuttles and other craft. A group of four TIE fighters, called a sentry group, was deployed to patrol the area around an Imperial ship or facility. A typical attack squadron consisted to 12 TIE fighters, and six squadrons together made up a full attack wing of 72 fighters.

At least a month after the Battle of Jakku, all TIE/ln starfighters possessed by the Queluhan Nebula Imperial remnant were upgraded with advanced weaponry invented by Ved Foslo, allowing them to punch through an enemy fighter's shields as well as hull, destroying them in a single hit.

==History==
===A day to come===
In 82 BBY,''Dooku: Jedi Lost'' establishes that the mission to Asusto took place immediately following the funeral of Countess Anya, which ''Star Wars: Timelines'' dates to 82 BBY. the Padawan Dooku faced down numerous visions of possible futures thanks to the torture he sustained at the hands of the Presagers of Hakotei during a mission to Asusto. In one vision,''Dooku: Jedi Lost'' a TIE fighter swooped past before the vision shifted into a space battle between TIE fighters and X-wing starfighters,''Dooku: Jedi Lost'' script which was only one of the many battles the young Dooku watched unfold. Later, Jedi Master Lene Kostana attempted to ease Dooku's worries about the futures he foresaw, letting him know nothing in them was a certainty.

===Era of the Empire===
====Development process====

Following the transformation of the Galactic Republic into the authoritarian Galactic Empire in 19 BBY, Republic era weapons and equipment would continue to be utilized throughout the Imperial sphere. As time went by, the Republic's Eta-2 ''Actis''-class light interceptor and ARC-170 starfighters began to be phased out roughly five years after the proclamation of the New Order. The Empire's regional Governor of the Outer Rim Territories, Grand Moff Wilhuff Tarkin, commissioned Sienar Fleet Systems to create a line of single-pilot, short-range starfighters for the Imperial Navy. Tarkin mandated that the weaponized fighters should be extremely fast and maneuverable, energy efficient, and inexpensive to manufacture.

Building off the advancements in starfighter engineering seen during the Clone Wars, Raith Sienar personally designed the fighters, basing them off designs from the Star Courier, Alpha-3 ''Nimbus''-class V-wing starfighter, and the Eta-2 ''Actis''-class light interceptor. The result was a central spherical pod positioned between two hexogonal solar energy-collecting wings. To minimize power drain and maximize maneuverability, Sienar eschewed typically standard systems such as deflector shields and a hyperdrive. The TIE fighter prototype was created during the development process. After a series of test flights, the Empire approved Sienar's design, and executed an exclusive contract with Sienar for the production of TIE fighters. First seeing use in 18 BBY, TIE fighters began to roll off assembly lines, with the Imperial mechanic Willard Waylin working on the TIE line since the beginning of their deployment, and were ready for deployment by the time of the invasion of Mon Cala, an event''Darth Vader'' (2017) 13 in 18 BBY intended as a showcase of Imperial might, such as through the deployment of the Empire's new starfighters.

====Across the stars====
thumb|left|200px|TIE fighters stationed at an Imperial airfield
The TIE fighter became a defining symbol of Imperial domination over its usage. With TIE pilots instructed to ignore their own well-being in order to achieve their objectives, the fighters were extremely fragile and their pilots expendable. With the Imperial Navy's vast size and unchallenged reign over the galaxy, the use of swarm tactics and subsequent mass production and refreshment of the vessels barely put a dent into Imperial manpower and industrial capacity. The low cost of production also spurred the craft's use. As a result, many features were sacrificed to facilitate mass production by Sienar Fleet Systems factories. Wilhuff Tarkin, an excellent pilot in his own right, was known to think very poorly of the TIE fighter due to its cramped cockpit and seemingly disposable nature.''Tarkin'' Imperial fighters also acted as psychological deterrents to potential seditious activities, with their roaring engines inspiring fear in those who heard them, leading to Imperial commanders to order their pilots to purposely fly low over areas that needed reminding of Imperial might.

Waylin would meet TIE pilots over his career as he worked on the ships and was always impressed by their refusal to back down, figuring that the ship design's drawbacks built character. As part of the five-year plan for the industrialization of the Outer Rim Territories, TIE fighters were produced on a number of planets, including Lothal. The Empire also gave some of its TIE fighters to loyalist companies to help secure its interests, leading to variants such as the Mining Guild TIE fighter. TIE fighters were deployed to put down the Moraysi rebellion and succeeded, with one TIE pilot in the engagement the former TK stormtrooper Ubrik Adelhard. Adelhard would go onto rise through the Imperial ranks, reaching the position of Grand Moff in time.''Battle of Jakku — Insurgency Rising'' 1

===Rise of the Rebellion===

thumb|right|300px|TIE fighters at the Aldhani Garrison
While the Empire's rule was absolute for years,''Star Wars: On the Front Lines'' rebels had begun to arise as early as a year into its reign''Ahsoka'' and an early rebellion against the Galactic Empire was waged. The Spectres fought Imperial forces, including TIE fighters, on Lothal and later joined with the Phoenix Cell.''Star Wars Rebels: The Siege of Lothal'' In 2 BBY, Mon Mothma brought various rebel cells together as the Alliance to Restore the Republic. While TIE fighters could engage unarmed and slightly defended civilian transports, they faced a more formidable foe in the form of the Alliance's starfighters.

TIE fighters were stationed at a starfighter factory on the Supply moon while it was visited by Darth Vader and the then incumbent Minister of War. As the factory was attacked by forces of the Alliance to Restore the Republic it engaged their fighters but was ultimately destroyed.

thumb|left|350px|TIE Fighters tried and failed to defend the first Death Star at the Battle of Yavin
Following the destruction of the first Death Star, the classification between Army and Navy pilots&mdash;referred to as ground-hogs and vac-heads respectively&mdash;was rescinded, and the Imperial Military was to undergo a mass reorganization. After the Rebels hijacked the ''Imperial I''-class Star Destroyer ''Harbinger'', Luke Skywalker and Sana Starros use the stolen TIE fighters to patrol as the disguise for sign of Rebels, even no sign of the Empire.''Star Wars'' (2015) 23

Over time, a variety of other models arose from the TIE line, including notable vessels such as the TIE/IN interceptor, TIE/sa bomber, TIE/sk x1 experimental air superiority fighter, TIE/d "Defender" Multi-Role Starfighter, and the TIE/rp Reaper attack lander, partly in direct response to faster and newer vessels manufactured by the Rebel Alliance. A variety of sub-models of the TIE series had arisen throughout Imperial history, with Sienar factories experimenting with localized improvements, producing advanced models suited to flying in local conditions and incorporating secret technological breakthroughs. Ships such as the TIE/ad v1 fighter would see use by flight barons and high-ranking members of the Inquisitorius, however its extreme cost would later relegate its successor, the TIE Advanced x1, to be flown only by elite pilots and members of the Imperial hierarchy such as Lord Vader. By the time of the Battle of Endor, TIE/IN Interceptors made up 20% of the Empire's starfighter fleet.''Star Wars Encyclopedia of Starfighters and Other Vehicles''

thumb|right|250px|TIE fighters on a Lothal airfield
Following the Battle of Endor, Imperial supply shortages would hinder the production and further development of TIE/ln starfighters, forcing ''Imperial''-class Star Destroyers to make do with an inadequate number of ships and inexperienced pilots.

Production data was classified, but according to numerous estimates, Sienar manufactured a minimum of approximately 4.6 million Imperial TIE fighters for Star Destroyers, other Imperial Naval vessels, and Imperial garrisons and defense stations. Most estimates maintain that more Imperial TIE fighters were operational at the same time than any other starfighter in history.

===Legacy===
thumb|200px|left|The First Order Special Forces TIE/sf was the evolution of the TIE/ln fighter.
The legacy of the TIE fighter was not forgotten on the galactic stage, with Sienar Fleet System's successor, Sienar-Jaemus Fleet Systems, producing the latest-generation TIE fighters utilized by the Empire's successor state, the First Order. The TIE/sf space superiority fighter and TIE/fo space superiority fighter were a direct continuance of the imprint the TIE fighter had on galactic citizenry, and featured advanced weapons systems and a two-seated arrangement for use by the Order's Special Forces.''Star Wars: The Force Awakens: Incredible Cross-Sections''

The Ugnaught Kuiil, himself former indentured servant of the Empire, used a workbench built out of an abandoned TIE cockpit.''Star Wars 100 Objects'' Future historians would argue that flaws inherent in the TIE fighter design were allowed to remain, if only to increase the Empire's dependency on Sienar Fleet Systems for continued production of the craft, along with increased dependency on Kuat Drive Yards capital-scale carrier ships.''Star Wars Propaganda: A History of Persuasive Art in the Galaxy''

==Behind the scenes==
thumb|left|250px|TIE fighter models being constructed for ''A New Hope''
Industrial Light & Magic's (ILM) Colin Cantwell created the concept model that established the TIE fighter's ball-cockpit and hexagonal-panels design for ''A New Hope''. Sound designer Ben Burtt created the distinctive TIE fighter sound effect by combining an elephant call with a car driving on wet pavement.''Star Wars: The Power of Myth''. DK Publishing, 2000.

The original TIE/ln fighters seen in ''A New Hope'' were relatively white, but were originally meant to have a maroon hull. One of the benefits of a slightly reddish color would have been that the fighter models would not have been as prone to "blue spill" as gray models were during filming against a blue screen. However, film composition tests revealed that the maroon ships blended too quickly into the mostly black star field when moving away from the camera, so a light gray was used instead. The TIE fighter models featured in ''The Empire Strikes Back'' and ''Return of the Jedi'' were blue-gray.

Combat scenes between TIE fighters and the ''Millennium Falcon'' and Rebel Alliance X-wing fighters in ''A New Hope'' were meant to be reminiscent of World War II dogfight footage; editors used World War II air combat clips as placeholders while Industrial Light & Magic completed the movie's special effects.Burns, Kevin, and Edith Becker (2004) ''Empire of Dreams: The Story of the Star Wars Trilogy''.

TIE/ln fighters are one of two starships available to Imperial players in ''Star Wars Battlefront'', the other being the TIE/IN interceptor. Compared to the X-wings and A-wings, TIE fighters lack shields but instead possess good maneuverability and speed. However, their large wing panels make them very easy to hit in dogfights, giving Rebel fighters a slight advantage in ship-to-ship engagements.

thumb|right|A TIE/ln as depicted in ''Rogue One: A Star Wars Story'', which featured a transparisteel window that was noticeably smaller than those seen in ''A New Hope''.
''Ultimate Star Wars'' stated that TIE fighters built on Lothal had shorter wings, as explanation for stylistic choices made for the TIE/ln's design in the animated series ''Star Wars Rebels''. However,  said that there is no difference. Since then, Pablo Hidalgo confirmed on Twitter that ''Ultimate Star Wars'' was incorrect.

TIE fighters later appeared in the 2016 anthology film ''Rogue One: A Star Wars Story''. Their animation model in the film featured noticeably smaller transparisteel windows that what was seen in prior ''Star Wars'' works, such as ''A New Hope''. The 2016 reference book ''Star Wars: Rogue One: The Ultimate Visual Guide'' by Pablo Hidalgo was the first reference book to identify the TIE fighter as the TIE/ln space superiority starfighter. It also defined the "ln" within the starfighter's name as standing for "line edition."

==Appearances==

===Non-canon appearances===

==Sources==

===Non-canon sources===
*''LEGO Star Wars'' 10
*''LEGO Star Wars'' 47
*''LEGO Star Wars'' 50
*''LEGO Star Wars'' 60
*''LEGO Star Wars'' 61
*''LEGO Star Wars'' 62
*
*''The Art of Star Wars: Visions''
*''LEGO Star Wars Visual Dictionary Updated Edition''
*

==Notes and references==

==External links==
*
*
*

Category:Starship classes of the Galactic Empire
L-ln

Category:Starship classes of the Imperial Remnant