
'''R2-D2''', pronounced '''Artoo-Deetoo''' and often referred to as '''R2 (Artoo)''', was an R2-series astromech droid manufactured by Industrial Automaton with masculine programming. A smart, spunky droid who served a multitude of leaders, R2-D2 was never given a full memory wipe nor did he ever receive new programming, with these factors resulting in an adventurous and independent attitude. Often finding himself in pivotal moments in galactic history, his bravery and ingenuity saved the galaxy on numerous occasions.

Beginning his service in the employ of Queen Amidala of Naboo, R2-D2 wound up serving Jedi Knight Anakin Skywalker during the waning years of the Galactic Republic, often accompanied by the protocol droid C-3PO in many adventures throughout the Clone Wars. After Skywalker turned to the dark side of the Force, the droid served Senator Bail Organa for a time in the Imperial Senate. Around nineteen years following the purge of the Galactic Republic, R2-D2 played a pivotal role in helping the Rebel Alliance destroy the Empire's Death Star superweapon. He carried technical readouts vital to its destruction. Serving Jedi Knight Luke Skywalker, the son of his two former masters throughout the Galactic Civil War, he participated in both the Battles of Hoth and Endor, and witnessed the successful destruction of the Empire's second Death Star four years after the first one was demolished.

In the subsequent thirty years, R2 accompanied Luke Skywalker until the undoing of his attempted resurrection of the Jedi Order in 28 ABY. Following Luke's disappearance, R2 entered a self-imposed low power mode as newer droid models started to out-compute the aging astromech. Despite this, his celebrated role in the Rebellion protected him from the usual recycling procedure of many old droids, allowing him a semi-retirement in the Resistance as he pored over several decades of uninterrupted data, and "dreamed" of his greatest adventures.

Following his reawakening after the Battle of Starkiller Base, R2 went on to accompany the Force-sensitive scavenger Rey on her journey to train under Luke Skywalker on Ahch-To, the planet of the First Jedi Temple, where the droid was reunited with his old master. R2-D2 continued to aid the Resistance alongside his longtime counterpart C-3PO throughout the First Order-Resistance War, culminating in a decisive victory at the Battle of Exegol, in which he was an active participant in the role of copilot for General Poe Dameron.

==Biography==
===Serving Padmé Amidala===

thumb|left|225px|R2-D2 repairing the shield generator of Queen Amidala's Royal Starship.
R2-D2 was built around prior or during 32 BBY. He was one of several astromech droids on Queen Padmé Amidala's Naboo Royal Starship during the invasion of Naboo by the Trade Federation that year. The ship was used by Queen Amidala and her entourage in an attempt to pass the blockade and escape the planet. Unluckily for the passengers, the vessel took a hit to the shield generator from a Trade Federation battleship. The four astromechs were sent out to repair the ship, but only R2-D2 survived &mdash; the rest were pulverized by stray blaster fire. R2-D2 was able to bring the shields online by bypassing the main power drive, allowing the ship to narrowly escape into hyperspace.

As the ship traveled to Tatooine, R2-D2 was taken before Sabé, the Queen's decoy in the guise of Amidala, where he was commended for his actions. The ship landed on Tatooine without any further incidents, although the voyage fried the hyperdrive. R2-D2 accompanied Jedi Master Qui-Gon Jinn, Gungan exile Jar Jar Binks, and Padmé, the queen in disguise, to the city of Mos Espa to find a replacement. In the junk shop of the Toydarian merchant Watto they found they could not afford a replacement hyperdrive and later took shelter from a sandstorm in the home of Watto's slaves, a boy named Anakin Skywalker, and his mother, Shmi.

At the Skywalker home, R2-D2 met C-3PO, a protocol droid that Anakin had built. The two bonded as they worked on Anakin's personal podracer. R2-D2 and C-3PO cheered for Anakin during the Boonta Eve Classic, where the boy would win his freedom, along with enough money to buy a new hyperdrive. R2-D2 accompanied the group to Coruscant, and from there back to Naboo. As Queen Amidala led an attempt to liberate the planet, R2-D2 nestled into an N-1 starfighter. Young Anakin, being ordered to hide in the cockpit by Qui-Gon Jinn, accidentally launched the fighter and the two flew into battle, destroyed the Droid Control Ship and shut down the droid armies, winning the battle and liberating Naboo. R2-D2 and his allies later attended a victory parade in Theed, though they were unable to be joined by Jinn, as he had been killed by the Sith Lord Darth Maul during the battle. Because of this, Skywalker became the Padawan learner to Obi-Wan Kenobi, who had been Jinn's apprentice before the Jedi Master's death.

Four years later, as Amidala's term ended, and she accepted a position in the Galactic Senate, R2-D2 accompanied her retinue to Coruscant on the orders of Naboo's new queen, Réillata. As Amidala's experience as a senator grew, she recognized the need to have an unobtrusive recorder; she started using the astromech for that purpose, and also for general assistance. During the Senate's break, Amidala returned to Naboo with her retinue and R2-D2, who accompanied her to her family home. There, R2-D2 was called over by Amidala to help her father Ruwee Naberrie build a greenhouse, only for the astromech droid to instead become enamored by Amidala's newborn niece, Ryoo Naberrie. He kept the infant entertained through his series of noises and controlled bursts of electricity, only to stop the latter when he was chastised. As he played with Ryoo in a safer way, Amidala told her sister and Ryoo's mother Sola about why R2-D2 had joined her retinue, after which Sola told the small droid that, while he needed given further direction on the matter, he worked well as a babysitter. R2-D2 responded with a chirping noise before moving his attention back to Ryoo.

In 26 BBY,''Star Wars: Timelines'' dates the events of ''Choose Your Destiny: An Obi-Wan & Anakin Adventure'' to 26 BBY. Jedi Grand Master Yoda, Jedi Master Mace Windu, and Jedi Master Bant Eerin launched a test for Kenobi and Skywalker by staging a fake kidnapping of Yoda. After traveling to the Wheel space station, the two Jedi took a comlink from Windu, who was disguised as the mobster Grynask Sanberge, back to their shuttle. When Skywalker was decrypting the comlink, he wished R2-D2 was with him, as he felt the droid friend he had met''Choose Your Destiny: An Obi-Wan & Anakin Adventure'' during the Naboo Crisis would have quickly finished the work.

===The Clone Wars===
====Genesis of the Clone Wars====

R2-D2 accompanied Amidala to Coruscant prior to the senate's vote on the Military Creation Act. After an assassination attempt on Amidala took the life of her handmaiden and decoy, Cordé, Obi-Wan Kenobi and Anakin Skywalker were assigned to be her Jedi protectors. That night, another assassination attempt was carried out. A pair of kouhuns narrowly missed killing Amidala and although one assassin, Zam Wesell, was neutralized, another escaped.

thumb|right|220x220px|R2 using his rockets just prior to the Battle of Geonosis.
For her own protection, Padmé was sent home to Naboo, with R2-D2 and Skywalker accompanying her. The three later traveled to Tatooine, where they were reunited with C-3PO, and then to Geonosis to rescue Kenobi. As they explored a massive droid factory, R2-D2 had to save Amidala from being killed by molten metal while C-3PO had his head switched with a battle droid's. R2 was later able to restore his companion during the Battle of Geonosis. After the battle, R2-D2 and C-3PO were the sole witnesses to the marriage of Anakin Skywalker and Padmé Amidala in Lake Country. After this Padmé gave ownership of R2 to Anakin while she kept 3PO.''Brotherhood''

====The Defense of Christophsis====
thumb|left|250x250px|R2-D2 with Anakin Skywalker and Obi-Wan Kenobi when Anakin and Ahsoka Tano first met.
Following the outbreak of the Clone Wars, R2-D2 accompanied Skywalker and Master Kenobi &mdash; who had both been promoted to the position of Jedi General &mdash; during the defense of the planet Christophsis against a besieging Separatist army led by Admiral Trench. When Clone Commander Cody and Clone Captain Rex discovered a spy among their number, R2-D2 helped to ferret out the traitor by monitoring his transmissions. The droid's work led to the arrest of Clone Sergeant Slick, who was identified as the traitor. During the subsequent battle, the Jedi and Clones managed to defeat the Separatist army by sabotaging their shield generator, which exposed them to Republic artillery. The Republic forces were also aided by the arrival of Ahsoka Tano, Skywalker's newly designated Togruta Padawan.

====Rescuing Rotta====
Following the defense of Christophsis, R2-D2, along with General Skywalker and Padawan Tano, took part in a mission to rescue Rotta, the son of the Hutt crime lord Jabba. While Skywalker and Tano laid siege to the Separatist-held B'omarr Order Monastery on Teth where Rotta was being held, R2-D2 sat in Skywalker's starfighter and maintained contact with General Kenobi. Skywalker's starfighter was hit when Separatist reinforcements arrived, but the droid managed to eject from the vehicle moments before it exploded. Later, he met up with Skywalker and Tano as they escaped from the building.

thumb|right|220x220px|R2 using his rockets to escape Ventress.
On the way, they encountered Asajj Ventress, a dark-side agent of the Separatist leader Count Dooku, and several B2-series super battle droids. Before a skirmish could occur, R2-D2 activated a trapdoor which sent everyone plunging down a chute into an arena. During the skirmish, R2-D2 assailed a second group of B2 battle droids, causing them to fall into the arena. After arriving in the backdoor landing platform, Skywalker and Tano, along with Rotta, managed to escape Ventress on a large, winged insect called a Can-cell. Artoo followed behind with his booster rockets. The group then left Teth on Skywalker's ship, the ''Twilight''.

Unable to rendezvous with the Star Destroyer, R2-D2 and his companions were forced to travel to Tatooine and deliver the Huttlet directly to his father, who had a desert palace there. R2-D2 programmed the coordinates into the ship's navicomputer, and it jumped to hyperspace. Arriving above Tatooine, the ''Twilight'' was attacked by Separatist vulture droids and crash-landed on the Dune Sea. R2-D2 and his companions were forced to continue the journey to Jabba's palace on foot. While Skywalker confronted Count Dooku, Artoo and Tano continued the journey to Jabba's palace. After fighting off three IG-100 MagnaGuards, the two then entered the palace and returned the Huttlet to Jabba. At that moment, a holo-transmission from Senator Amidala on Coruscant identified Jabba's uncle Ziro as the instigator behind the kidnapping, which placated an angry Jabba. As a result, the Republic was able to conclude a treaty with Jabba.

====Hunting the ''Malevolence''====
thumb|left|220x220px|R2 helping Anakin brief Shadow Squadron for their mission with his holo-projector.
R2-D2, along with Anakin Skywalker and Obi-Wan Kenobi, later took part in the hunt for General Grievous' flagship &mdash; the ''Subjugator''-class heavy cruiser ''Malevolence'' &mdash; which had destroyed several Republic warships. After a prolonged hunt, Skywalker's ''Venator''-class Star Destroyer ''Resolute'' prepared to destroy the ''Malevolence'' near the Kaliida Nebula. However, their mission was complicated by the arrival of Senator Padmé Amidala's yacht, which had been lured there by disinformation. Unwilling to endanger his wife, Skywalker, accompanied by R2-D2 and Kenobi, boarded the ''Malevolence'' to rescue her.

During their mission aboard the ''Malevolence'', R2-D2 remained at the airlock entrance where he shut down the rail jet hovertrain under orders from Skywalker. He then helped locate his old friend C-3PO, who had arrived with Amidala and gotten lost aboard the massive warship. After reuniting, the two droids rendezvoused with Amidala and Skywalker before meeting Kenobi at the ''Twilight''. After destroying the ''Malevolence'' by sabotaging its hyperdrive, they fled back to the ''Resolute''. Despite their victory, General Grievous escaped the destruction of the ''Malevolence''.

====Captive of General Grievous====
thumb|right|250x250px|R2 being taken apart.
During the Separatist assault on Bothawui, R2-D2 flew in the droid socket of General Skywalker's starfighter. While pursuing General Grievous' starfighter, Skywalker and R2-D2's starfighter was hit by a piece of shrapnel. Skywalker was rescued by Republic forces but Artoo was recovered by the Trandoshan scavenger Gha Nachkt, who sold him to General Grievous. Nachkt traveled to Grievous' secret listening post Skytop Station, which lay in the Ruusan system. Knowing Artoo's relationship with Skywalker, the Separatist military leader ordered Nachkt to disassemble the astromech droid and extract all information on the Republic's military strategies from him.

thumb|left|300px|R2-D2 dueling with the Separatist droid R3-S6.
During his captivity, R2-D2 had managed to broadcast an emergency transmission to Skywalker, who traveled to Skytop Station and rescued him. Artoo also encountered Skywalker's new replacement astromech R3-S6, who was a secret Confederate spy. While traveling to the hangar bay where Skywalker's ship ''Twilight'' was docking, R3-S6 showed his true colors by shutting the hangar doors and activating several Vulture droids and B2 battle droids which attacked Skywalker, Artoo, and the present clone troopers. Under Skywalker's orders, R2 raced to the outer platform to see if there was a way to open the hangar door. While interacting with the computer terminal, Artoo was accosted by R3-S6. Following a scuffle, R2-D2 defeated and neutralized the Separatist spy droid. Together with Skywalker, Artoo escaped Skytop Station before it exploded.

====Mission to Orto Plutonia====
Later, R2-D2 accompanied C-3PO, General Skywalker, Master Kenobi and a unit of clone troopers on a mission to investigate the disappearance of a local clone trooper garrison on the icy world of Orto Plutonia. Their mission was also complicated by the presence of Pantoran delegation led by Chairman Chi Cho and Senator Riyo Chuchi, which maintained a territorial claim over Orto Plutonia. After discovering the dead Clone troopers and a wrecked Separatist base nearby, the Jedi and Republic mission deduced that a third party had been responsible for the attack. Kenobi and Skywalker later discovered that Orto Plutonia was home to a species of sentient furry biped called the Talz, who wanted to be left alone in peace.

After an ensuing conflict between the Pantorans and the Talz, R2-D2 and C-3PO accompanied Senator Chuchi, the Jedi, and some clone troopers to the scene of the battle, where Chuchi and C-3PO made peace with the Talz Chieftain Thi-Sen and renounced Pantora's claim to Orto Plutonia.

====Blue Shadow Virus====
Following the discovery of a secret Separatist bioweapons research facility in Naboo's eastern swamps, R2-D2 accompanied General Skywalker, Padawan Tano, and Master Kenobi when they traveled to Naboo to apprehend the Separatist scientist Doctor Nuvo Vindi. With the aid of Senator Amidala, Representative Binks, C-3PO, and several Clone troopers, Artoo and the Jedi managed to capture Dr Vindi and to secure his facility, which was producing a deadly virus called the Blue Shadow Virus. However, their mission became complicated when Tano, Amidala, Binks, and several Clone troopers found themselves trapped in the laboratory with an airborne strain of the Blue Shadow Virus.

Learning that the root of the Reeksa plant contained the antidote to the Blue Shadow Virus, R2-D2 along with Skywalker and Kenobi traveled to the planet Iego on the ''Twilight'' to obtain the plant. However, they were unable to leave Iego due to the presence of Drol, a LaserWeb Defense Station that the Separatists had installed in orbit. R2-D2 helped the two Jedi to break through Drol by slave-rigging several Vulture droids and sending them on kamikaze runs against the space station. Artoo's role in destroying Drol enabled Skywalker and Kenobi to travel back to Naboo with the Reeksa plant antidote &mdash; allowing them to save the lives of Senator Amidala, Ahsoka Tano, and the clone troopers.

====Liberation of Ryloth====
thumb|right|325px|Master and droid tinker with Tano's starfighter above Ryloth.
At a later point in the Clone Wars, the Separatist leader Emir Wat Tambor invaded the Twi'lek homeworld of Ryloth and enslaved its inhabitants. R2-D2 was part of the Republic force led by General Anakin Skywalker and Commander Ahsoka Tano that was sent to relieve Ryloth. During the Battle of Ryloth, the Republic reinforcements sustained significant casualties &mdash; including the loss of the ''Venator''-class Star Destroyer ''Redeemer''. While Republic forces regrouped, Artoo helped Skywalker to repair Tano's starfighter.

R2-D2 later took part in the Republic counterattack against the Separatist blockade when he and Skywalker piloted the damaged Star Destroyer ''Defender'' into the Separatist flagship. Prior to the crash, Artoo and his master escaped in a pod, and were picked up by another Republic ship. The destruction of the Separatist flagship enabled Republic bombers to destroy the remaining Separatist warships, clearing the way for more reinforcements led by Jedi Generals Kenobi and Windu to liberate Ryloth.

====Hunting Cad Bane====
R2-D2 later participated in a joint Republic and Jedi operation to hunt down the Separatist-employed bounty hunter Cad Bane, who had stolen a holocron from the Jedi Temple on Coruscant. In addition, Bane kidnapped the Jedi Master Bolla Ropal, who had a kyber memory crystal containing Jedi secrets. Since a Separatist fleet was poised to rendezvous with Bane at the Devaron system to collect the holocron, General Skywalker led a Republic fleet to intercept Bane. R2-D2 along Skywalker, Tano, and Captain Rex succeeded in boarding the bounty hunter's ''Munificent''-class star frigate.

In response, Bane killed Master Ropal and set his ship to self-destruct. During the fighting aboard the Separatist cruiser, R2-D2 aided his companions by locating Ropal's cell and later reactivating the artificial gravity during a skirmish with battle droids. Ahsoka was taken hostage by Bane during the fighting. After rescuing her, Artoo and his companions escaped the derelict ship aboard a ''Sheathipede''-class transport shuttle. However, the Jedi failed to recover the stolen holocron and Bane managed to escape the battlefield by impersonating a clone trooper. Using the holocron and the stolen kyber crystal, Bane disguised himself as a Jedi and began kidnapping Force-sensitive children under orders from Darth Sidious.

After recapturing Cad Bane on Naboo, R2-D2, along with Skywalker and Tano, examined Bane's starfighter ''Xanadu Blood'' and discovered that he had recently traveled to the volcanic planet of Mustafar. Artoo later accompanied his master and Tano to Mustafar where they managed to rescue the children, following a skirmish with Separatist droids. However, they were unable to locate the mastermind who hired Bane, Darth Sidious.

====The Senate Hostage Crisis====

thumb|left|300px|R2-D2 visiting the Droid Spa.
Following R2-D2 and Skywalker's adventures with Cad Bane, the two visited Senator Amidala on Coruscant. The Senator and C-3PO were organizing a party for Senator Aang, a friend of Amidala. After R2-D2 forgot to buy some jogan fruit for garnishing the jogan fruitcake, Skywalker sent Artoo and Threepio to the lower market districts. The two droids quarreled on the way, with C-3PO blaming him for his incompetence.

However, C-3PO was swindled by the fruit vendor, who overcharged for the jogan fruit. Right after the purchase, a droid called Todo 360 came up to them and suggested that the two droids relax at a nearby droid spa. Artoo enthusiastically agreed. On the way to the spa, the two droids were separated and C-3PO was kidnapped by Todo 360 and a fellow sentinel droid called HELIOS-3E. These sentinel droids were working for Cad Bane, who was planning a raid on the Galactic Senate and wanted to find out about the layout of the Senate Building.

When C-3PO refused to provide the information, Bane ordered his droid henchmen to kidnap R2-D2. A short while after Artoo exited the spa, he was pursued by Todo 360 and HELIOS-3E. Artoo managed to hide in a dark alley but surrendered himself after learning that Bane planned to dismantle Threepio. Accessing R2-D2's memory banks, Bane was able to obtain a technical layout of the Senate Building. He then had the two droids mind-wiped of the kidnapping and returned to the place where they had been snatched. Completely unaware of what had transpired previously, R2-D2 and C-3PO returned to Amidala's apartment with the jogan fruit. Following their kidnapping and release, Bane and several associates invaded the Senate and kidnapped several Senators in a successful attempt to force the Republic to release Jabba's uncle Ziro.

====Exposing the Senate Spy====
thumb|right|300px|R2-D2 and Anakin's Padawan Ahsoka during one of his many Clone Wars missions.
R2-D2 and C-3PO were briefly reunited when the two droids accompanied their masters Senator Amidala and General Skywalker on a sensitive mission to Cato Neimoidia. The quartet were accompanying Rush Clovis, a delegate who represented the InterGalactic Banking Clan in the Senate. The Jedi Council suspected that Clovis was secretly reporting to the Separatists, and sent Skywalker and Amidala to spy on him. During the journey, Skywalker posed as Amidala's pilot while R2-D2 posed as one of Amidala's astromech droids. Upon arriving on Cato Neimoidia, Artoo and Skywalker stayed aboard Amidala's ship while Amidala, Clovis, and C-3PO met the Trade Federation's Senator Lott Dod.

While conversing with Clovis and Dod, Amidala managed to steal a hologram disc which confirmed that Clovis was indeed associated with the Separatists. Amidala managed to pass the datacard to Skywalker and R2-D2 before she succumbed to the effects of a poison drink spiked by Senator Dod. After securing the datacard and an antidote for Amidala, R2-D2 and his companions left Cato Neimoidia. Clovis was left behind to face a displeased Senator Dod. Using the intelligence obtained from the stolen datacard, Republic and Jedi forces were able to destroy a Separatist droid factory on Geonosis.

====Mission to Mandalore====
Later, R2-D2 accompanied Generals Skywalker and Kenobi on a sensitive mission to escort the Mandalorian Duchess Satine Kryze, who was traveling to the Galactic Senate on Coruscant to plead the case for her homeworld's neutrality. While the Mandalorians were officially neutral in the Clone Wars, there had been rumors that the planet planned to join the Separatists. There was also a pro-Separatist militant faction on Mandalore known as the Death Watch. Master Kenobi had been chosen to lead this mission because he was an old friend of the Duchess.

Duchess Satine was traveling to Coruscant on the Mandalorian luxury spaceliner ''Coronet''. Under orders from Skywalker and Kenobi, R2-D2 and several Clone troopers probed the ship for any signs of Death Watch or Separatist activity. After entering hyperspace, the Jedi and clones were attacked by several assassin probes. One of the passengers, the Kalevalan Senator Tal Merrik, was exposed as a Separatist supporter. Merrik took Satine hostage and seized control of the cockpit. Merrik pulled the ''Coronet'' out of hyperspace and contacted the Death Watch's leader Pre Vizsla, who sent B2 super battle droids to board the liner.

R2-D2 along with the clones and Jedi fought off the Separatist boarders. During the fighting, Merrik was killed by Skywalker and Duchess Satine was freed by the Jedi. Following the defeat of the Death Watch and Separatists, the ''Coronet'' arrived in Coruscant safely with Duchess Satine. After some further Separatist attempts to sabotage her peace mission, Duchess Satine was able to convince the Galactic Senate, with the help of Senator Amidala and Master Kenobi, that Mandalore should remain neutral during the Clone Wars. As a result, the Senate rescinded an earlier order to occupy Mandalore.

====The Zillo Beast affair====
thumb|left|300px|R2-D2 and C-3PO during the Zillo Beast incident.
Later, R2-D2 accompanied General Skywalker during the Battle of Malastare. The Republic was fighting against the Separatists for access to Malastare's vast fuel reserves. The Republic's Grand Army fought alongside the Dugs against the Separatist droid army. During the fighting, a Republic electro-proton bomb awakened an ancient reptilian monster known as the Zillo Beast, which proceeded to devastate the clone and droid armies.

During the fighting, R2-D2 and Skywalker barely escaped their starfighter before it was devoured by the Zillo Beast. Skywalker held on to R2-D2 as they rocketed away from the monster. Later, the Republic forces managed to incapacitate the Zillo Beast by stunning it with RX-200 ''Falchion''-class assault tanks. Following the battle, Supreme Chancellor Palpatine ordered that the Zillo Beast be brought to Coruscant for further study &mdash; despite the misgivings of General Windu and General Skywalker. Palpatine hoped to use its scales to develop a new armor for the Grand Army.

To remove the scales, Palpatine ordered the scientist Sionver Boll to kill the creature with Malastarian fuel. However, Senator Amidala learned of Palpatine's plan and arranged a meeting with Skywalker and Kenobi. Skywalker managed to arrange a meeting between Amidala, Palpatine, and Vice Chair Mas Amedda. However, the Zillo Beast escaped Boll's laboratory at the same time and proceeded to wreck havoc on the streets of Coruscant. Sensing that Palpatine was a Sith, the Zillo Beast made its way to the Galactic Senate building. R2-D2 and C-3PO escaped in an executive ship along with Skywalker, Palpatine, and some others, but the ship was captured by the Zillo Beast.

Before the monster could devour the ship, Skywalker managed to use his lightsaber to cleave the vessel in half; sending the bow along with R2-D2 and the other passengers plummeting into the Senate Building. R2-D2 managed to activated his booster rockets and rescue C-3PO. The astromech droid also used a tow cable to attach himself to the other side of the building. R2-D2 was forced to drop C-3PO to rescue Palpatine. Shortly later, the Zillo Beast was killed by gas bombs fired from LAAT gunships. Due to this quick intervention, R2-D2 survived the Zillo Beast incident and continued serving Skywalker.

====The Vanqor Trap====
thumb|right|300px|R2 struggling with a Gundark
After the ''Venator''-class Star Destroyer ''Endurance'' crash-landed on the planet Vanqor, R2-D2 along with General Skywalker, Master Mace Windu, and the astromech droid R8-B7 participated in a mission to rescue the crew and passengers of the stricken vessel. Unbeknownst to them, the former bounty hunter and clone template Jango Fett's son Boba Fett had sabotaged the vessel and set a trap for the Jedi. He intended to avenge the death of his father by murdering Master Windu, who had killed Jango Fett during the Battle of Geonosis.

While approaching the vessel, R2-D2 beeped that "he had a bad feeling about this." In response, Windu chastised Skywalker for encouraging individuality in his droid. While exploring the bridge of the stricken Star Destroyer, the Jedi and droids came across the bodies of dead clone troopers who had been executed, rather than killed by the impact of the crash. While searching for survivors, R2-D2 and R8-B7 were pursued and set upon by a pack of gundarks. R8-B7 was ripped apart while R2-D2 was knocked to the ground. Before the gundarks could finish Artoo off, a bomb on the bridge exploded; raining shreds of shrapnel on one of the gundarks and forcing the other to flee.

R2-D2 came up to the bridge and found Skywalker and Windu had survived the blast, but were trapped under the rubble. When R2-D2 attempted to move the debris, he caused the bridge to shudder. Skywalker warned R2-D2 to stop trying to free them. Instead, he instructed the astromech to return to their Jedi starfighter and contact the Jedi Temple on Coruscant for help. While leaving the bridge, R2-D2 was pursued by Boba Fett's bounty hunter associates including Aurra Sing. He managed to escape, and delayed them by using debris to block them.

R2 managed to reach the Jedi starfighters, but he was then accosted by the remaining gundark. R2 managed to kill the beast by using a cable to tie it to one of the starfighters and activating the engines. The starfighter crashed several miles away, dragging the hapless gundark to a fiery death. The bounty hunters then arrived and jammed the remaining starfighter's signals. They attempted to capture R2-D2; however, before they could, the astromech droid blasted the ship into hyperspace and traveled to Coruscant. On his way to the briefing room, he bumped into R4-M1 and R5-S9. Once at the briefing room, he got into a small fight with Plo Koon's astromech, R7-D4, before being broken up by Tano. Koon then allowed the R2 unit to relay Skywalker's message to the other Jedi in person. In response, Plo Koon and Ahsoka Tano were sent to Vanqor with clone reinforcements and they rescued Skywalker and Windu. R2-D2 was commended for his bravery. However, Boba Fett and his associates continued to trouble the Jedi.

====Infiltrating the Citadel====

thumb|left|250px|R2-D2 and his battle droid squadron.
After taking part in the Battle of Sullust, R2-D2 and his Jedi masters, along with several clone troopers, later took part in a mission to infiltrate the Separatist stronghold Citadel on the planet Lola Sayu and free the Jedi Master Even Piell. Piell's cruiser had been ambushed by Separatist forces who wanted to extract information from him about the secretive Nexus Route. As part of the plan, R2-D2 and a group of reprogrammed battle droids piloted a ''Sheathipede''-class Type B shuttle through enemy lines. To fool the Separatist life form detectors, the entire Jedi and Clone trooper strike team were frozen in carbonite. This plot worked and the Jedi-Republic strike team succeeded in landing at a cavern near the Citadel.

After unfreezing the Jedi and clone troopers, R2-D2 waited aboard the shuttle while the strike team freed Master Piell and several Republic officers including Captain Wilhuff Tarkin. After achieving their objectives, General Skywalker contacted Artoo to prepare their ship for departure and to meet them at the landing platform. However, the platform was occupied by several Separatist droids. Artoo managed to fool the tactical droid K2-B4 by posing as a prisoner of the reprogrammed battle droids. This enabled R2 to infiltrate the prison complex and flee General Kenobi and his team who had been captured.

Following the destruction of their escape transport, Master Piell and R2-D2 contacted the Jedi Council for help. The Jedi Council dispatched a task force of four warships led by Master Plo Koon to rescue Skywalker and Kenobi's rescue team. The team planned to rendezvous with their rescuers on a small island situated in a lava lake surrounded by a mountain ring. They were pursued by droid forces led by the Separatist warden Osi Sobeck who was intent on recovering his prisoners. During the fighting, R2-D2's battle droid squadron sacrificed themselves to hold back the battle droids while Master Piell was murdered by an Anooba, but not before disclosing his secret information to Ahsoka Tano. Later, the Jedi and Republic strike team were rescued by Plo Koon's forces.

====Mission to Aleen====
thumb|right|250px|R2-D2 and C-3PO inspecting the water seal leading to Aleen's underworld.
R2-D2 was again reunited with his protocol droid counterpart when the two droids took part in a Republic mercy mission to the Mid Rim planet of Aleen, which was experiencing a series of catastrophic global earthquakes. While R2-D2 was tasked with interfacing with the equipment, C-3PO served as a translator between the locals and the Clone Commander Wolffe. During their mission, R2-D2 and C-3PO visited a local Republic communications mission to survey and repair the damage caused by the recent earthquake. Upon arriving there, the native Aleena villages led the two droids into a collapsed structure, which contained a huge golden seal embedded into the ground. The seal turned out to be the entrance to a tunnel that led to the subterranean regions of Aleen. Their arrival coincided with an earthquake and the two droids fell into the tunnel and were separated from the clone troopers and villagers.

While exploring the underground tunnels, R2-D2 and C-3PO encountered a species of sentient, tree-like beings called the Kindalo, who demanded that they leave since the surface dwellers "destroyed the peace." After C-3PO managed to convince the Kindalo that they bore no ill will and had come to help with the earthquakes, the Kindalo sent the two droids to meet Orphne, a reptilian humanoid with mystical powers. Orphne told the two droids that a mutual balance had previously existed between the Aleena and the subterranean world. Since Aleena's atmosphere was toxic to them, the underground dwellers depended on a filtering process of the planet's soil that made the air breathable for them. The underground dwellers had set off this earthquake as a means of sealing the breach.

When C-3PO agreed to help fix the damage, Orphne gave the droids a parting riddle. R2-D2 quickly deduced that Orphne was referring to a river and used the water seal to activate a water spout that sent the two droids and the chamber's central floor plate back to the surface. The two droids landed at the opening where they were greeted by a chanting crowd of Aleena. Recalling the riddle, two droids quickly realized that they had to fix the breach, which was in fact the unsettled seal. Together, R2-D2 and C-3PO closed the seal which brought an end to Aleen's earthquakes. While Wolffe and his clone troopers were skeptical of their story, the two droids' efforts were greatly appreciated by the Aleena.

====Further adventures====
Following the events on Allena, R2-D2 and C-3PO were caught up in a second adventure. While traveling aboard the Jedi Master Adi Gallia's cruiser, their starship was attacked by three Separatist cruisers led by General Grievous. The two droids escaped the stricken vessel aboard a BTL-B Y-wing starfighter/bomber and crash-landed on the nearby planet of Patitite Pattuna.

thumb|left|250px|R2-D2 rescued C-3PO from the Separatist incinerator
On Pattuna, they were captured by the indigenous Patitites, who brought them before their obese leader Hay-Zu. During their meeting, R2-D2 accidentally murdered the tyrannical overlord &mdash; much to the joy of the Patitites, who released the two droids and allowed them to leave on their Y-wing. With their starfighter's power systems damaged, R2-D2 and C-3PO were forced to land on another planet called Balnab. The indigenous Balnabs captured the two droids and brought them before their leader, who turned out to be a holo-projection created by a group of rogue pit droids. These pit droids had enslaved the Balnabs. After R2-D2 exposed the scam, the Balnabs rebelled against their droid overlords.

R2-D2 and C-3PO took the opportunity to escape and resume their search for a replacement power unit for their Y-wing starfighter. Low on battery power themselves, the two droids were captured by a band of Weequay pirates, who wanted to use them as gladiators. However, the Weequay's pirate ship ''Marauder'' was attacked by General Grievous' cruiser. During the bombardment, C-3PO and R2-D2 were sucked out of the ''Marauder'' by a hull-breach. R2-D2 used his rocket boosters to bring him and C-3PO aboard Grievous' ship. Grievous ordered the two droids to be melted down in his incinerator but they were rescued by a Republic fleet led by Master Plo Koon, who had come to rescue Master Gallia. R2-D2 and C-3PO were subsequently rescued by Plo Koon's forces and resumed their services to Senator Amidala and General Skywalker respectively.

====Fighting the Zygerrians====
Later, R2-D2 accompanied his masters Anakin Skywalker, Ahsoka Tano, and Obi-Wan Kenobi on a mission to the planet Kiros, which was home to a Togrutan colony. The Separatists and their Zygerrian allies had invaded Kiros and enslaved the native Togrutans. During the battle on Kiros, R2-D2 accompanied the Republic assault on the Separatist forces there. The astromech droid played his part by helping the Republic forces to locate Separatist bombs planted in Kiros' capital city with his scanners. Later, R2-D2 accompanied Skywalker and Tano on a mission to infiltrate the Zygerrian planet Kadavo in order to free Kenobi, the Clone trooper captives, and the enslaved Togrutans. Following a battle, the Republic succeeded in achieving these objectives and dealing a heavy blow against the Zygerrian Slave Empire.

====Escaping Death Watch====
thumb|right|250px|R2, Ahsoka, and Lux fleeing the Death Watch
R2-D2 later accompanied Ahsoka, Senators Amidala, Bail Organa, and Mon Mothma on a peace mission to the neutral world of Mandalore. Under the auspices of the Mandalorian Duchess Satine Kryze, Republic and Separatist delegates were meeting there to discuss a peaceful solution to the Clone Wars. The proceedings were interrupted by the Onderonian junior senator Lux Bonteri, who accused Count Dooku of conspiring to murder his mother, Senator Mina Bonteri. R2-D2 and Ahsoka barely managed to rescue Lux from murder by the Separatists and fled from Mandalore.

However, Lux was unwilling to join the Republic and hijacked the ship in order to take it to the icy planet of Carlac, where he had planned to join the Death Watch, an exiled Mandalorian faction who were then conspiring to kill Count Dooku. On Carlac, R2-D2 was put to work repairing their batch of battle droids, which were used for target practice, and quickly befriended them. Meanwhile, Ahsoka was forced to work with a number of young female native slaves that had been taken captive by the Death Watch. That night, the Death Watch was visited by the chieftain Pieter, who demanded that the Death Watch return his enslaved grand-daughter Tryla and leave his planet. Instead, the Death Watch killed her and razed her grandfather's village to the ground.

Ahsoka and Lux fought against the Death Watch and managed to help Pieter and several of the villagers to escape. Ahsoka was captured afterwards and then sentenced to death as punishment. After seeing Ahsoka in bonds, R2-D2 convinced the newly-repaired Death Watch droids to help him rescue her. Before the Death Watch leader Pre Vizsla could execute her, R2-D2 managed to blind Vizsla and return her lightsabers. While Tano parried with Vizsla, R2-D2's droid companions kept the remaining Death Watch members busy. This diversion enabled R2-D2 to escape with Ahsoka and Lux on a speeder. After fighting off their pursuers, they managed to escape aboard their ship and head offworld. Lux decided to depart the ship in an escape pod but vowed to meet Ahsoka again.

====Younglings and pirates====
thumb|left|250px|R2-D2 (second from the left), Huyang, Ahsoka, and the Jedi younglings confronting General Grievous.
R2-D2 later accompanied Ahsoka Tano who was escorting six Jedi younglings to the planet Ilum to complete The Gathering, an initiation rite prior to Jedi commencing their training as Padawans. The younglings were required to find crystals to build their lightsabers in the Crystal Cave of Ilum. On the way back to Coruscant, their Jedi training cruiser, the ''Crucible'', was intercepted by the pirate Hondo Ohnaka and his gang. Before R2-D2 could effect an escape, the pirates boarded the ship. They intended to steal the youngling's lightsaber crystals and sell them on the black market. During the skirmish, Tano ordered Artoo and the younglings Zatt and Ganodi to secure the deck while the droid Huyang and the other younglings hid in the deck. Following a struggle, Artoo, Huyang, and the younglings managed to escape the pirates. However, Hondo kidnapped Ahsoka and left Artoo and the others to deliver the bad news to the Jedi Council.

Left adrift in space, the younglings managed to contact General Kenobi, who promised to send a rescue mission to relieve them and to rescue Ahsoka from the pirate Hondo. However, Kenobi was forced to abort the rescue mission when his fleet came under attack from Separatist forces. Alone, the six younglings hatched a mission to rescue Ahsoka. With the ''Crucible'' engines critically damaged during the skirmish with Hondo, the younglings landed on the planet Florrum. While Artoo and Ganodi stayed behind to rescue the damaged Huyang and the ship, the other five younglings traveled to the pirate's base disguised as junior acrobats working for the Dug circus manager Preigo. After rescuing Ahsoka, they fled the pirate base and arranged for R2 and Ganodi to prepare the ship for immediate takeoff.

While flying to pick up the younglings and Ahsoka, the ''Crucible'' was shot down by the pirates; forcing Artoo, Ganodi, and Huyang to evacuate the vessel. Hondo's pirates quickly recaptured Ahsoka and her youngling rescuers. However, the arrival of a Separatist droid army under General Grievous forced the Jedi prisoners to work together with their former pirate captors. Ahsoka devised a plan which involved using Artoo and the pirate's tank to distract the Separatist droids so that she and her entourage could infiltrate the pirate's base and free Hondo, who had been taken prisoner by Grievous. After freeing Hondo, the united Jedi and pirates proceeded to liberate the rest of Hondo's men. During the skirmish, R2-D2's tank was boarded by Grievous. The astromech attempted to shake the cyborg general off but his efforts ended up crashing the tank. In the end, R2-D2 along with Ahsoka, the younglings, and the pirates managed to escape aboard Hondo's escape ship, the rebuilt ''Slave I''.

====Serving in D-Squad====
thumb|right|300px|R2-D2 (center) and the rest of D-Squad.
R2-D2 later participated in a mission devised by the Jedi Council to capture a Separatist decoding module from the vault of a Separatist warship. Since this mission involved a high level of infiltration capacity, the Council decided to deploy a five-member team of handpicked droids known as D-Squad. R2-D2 was part of the squad along with the astromech droids QT-KT, M5-BZ, and U9-C4, and the pit droid WAC-47. Their mission was led by Meebur Gascon, a diminutive male Zilkin who served as a Colonel in the Grand Army of the Republic.

After a brief skirmish, the droids managed to infiltrate the Separatist warship and steal the decoding module. They then escaped the warship. While traveling back to Coruscant, their transport shuttle was damaged by ice comets and crash-landed on the nearby waste planet of Abafar. As D-Squad continued their journey across the wasteland, Gascon assigned R2-D2 with the task of carrying the module. The stress of the mission created strains between Gascon and the astromech droids, who separated. After WAC appointed himself the leader of the squad, the astromech droids abandoned him and continued their journey to a sunken city. Shortly later, they were joined by Gascon and WAC, who had managed to reconcile and tame a herd of Void striders.

Reunited, the droids and Colonel Gascon traveled to the seedy town of Pons Ora. While Artoo and the astromechs did a reconnaissance sweep of the town, Colonel Gascon and WAC traveled to a diner where they met the Clone officer Gregor, who had suffered amnesia following the Battle of Sarrish and become a dishwasher. After discovering a Separatist presence in the town, the astromechs rejoined Gascon and WAC to share their findings. With R2-D2's help, Gascon and D-Squad managed to convince Gregor that he was a Clone trooper and to get him to help them. Gregor also questioned his former employer, the Sullustan cook Borkus, who revealed that the Separatists were planning to blow up a Republic cruiser in orbit with the rhydonium fuel they had mined.

Using Borkus' information, D-Squad returned to the landing zone and confirmed that Borkus was telling the truth. D-Squad unanimously agreed to save the cruiser. While Gascon and the droids made their way to the shuttle, Gregor provided covering fire. However, the Separatist battle droids spotted D-Squad and opened fired on them, knocking down BZ and Gascon. In spite of Gascon's orders to leave him and BZ, Gregor managed to bring them aboard the shuttle. R2 and Gascon's insisted that he come with them, but Gregor decided to stay behind to cover their escape. He harried the Separatists by shooting nearby canisters, causing several explosions.

Upon escaping Pons Ora, R2-D2 and the rest of D-Squad traveled to a ''Venator''-class Star Destroyer, which was orbiting Abafar. Upon arriving, they discovered that the Separatists had already seized control of the ship and were planning to use the rhydonium-laden to disrupt a crucial Republic strategy conference aboard the space station ''Valor'' above the planet Carida. Despite Gascon's objections, R2-D2 and the rest of D-Squad joined forces with the LEP-series service droid Bunny to stop the Separatist plot.

Following a struggle, they managed to neutralize the Separatist forces aboard. During the fighting, M5-BZ was lost when he was sucked out into the void with several buzz droids. Gascon then devised a plan for the rest of D-Squad to evacuate aboard a shuttle while R2-D2 defused the trigger mechanism. However, they were ambushed by a super tactical droid who led several battle droid reinforcements. While Gascon and U9-C4 opened fire on the battle droids, R2-D2 tussled with the super tactical droid. As the other droids retreated aboard the shuttle, Gascon refused to leave R2-D2 behind but WAC initiated liftoff.

thumb|left|250px|R2's remains, located after the Carida incident
Meanwhile, R2-D2 gained the upper hand over the tactical droid and managed to reprogram the detonator,
causing the rhydonium to explode prematurely and destroy the Star Destroyer. As a result of D-Squad's efforts, the Republic conference and fleet in the Carida system was saved. While Gascon believed that R2-D2 had perished during the struggle, Skywalker refused to believe this was so and sent salvage teams to scour the wreckage. They managed to retrieve R2-D2 and repair the damaged astromech droid. Following the astromech droid's recovery, Gascon personally praised him for his bravery and told D-Squad that he would be honored to work with them again.

====Dogfight above Cato Neimoidia====
R2-D2, along with his masters Skywalker and Tano, later participated in the defense of Cato Neimoidia. The planet had come under attack from the Separatists. During the battle, Skywalker's starfighter was attacked by buzz droids. After Skywalker was knocked out by a powerful blast, R2-D2 took control of the starfighter. Under Ahsoka's orders, he landed the fighter on Cato Neimoidia's surface to bring the unconscious Skywalker to safety.

Shortly after this, Skywalker and Ahsoka were summoned back to the Jedi Temple on Coruscant to investigate a bomb attack. R2-D2 accompanied his masters back to Coruscant to assist with the investigation.

====Mission to Scipio====
R2-D2 later accompanied General Skywalker to the planet Scipio. Skywalker's spouse Senator Amidala had traveled to Scipio on a mercy mission to secure funds from the InterGalactic Banking Clan to aid refugees displaced by the Clone Wars. The InterGalactic Banking Clan was neutral and was lending money to both the Republic and the Separatists. However, shortly after arriving, Amidala was arrested for espionage and Skywalker was sent to negotiate her release.

R2-D2 and Skywalker's mission was complicated by the presence of Clovis, the pro-Separatist senator whom Amidala had flirted with during an earlier mission to Cato Neimoidia. Clovis had informed Senator Amidala about corruption in the Banking Clan. Prior to departing Scipio, Skywalker and Amidala went to retrieve files from a vault in Clovis' alpine residence. After being attacked by the bounty hunter Embo, Skywalker and Amidala were forced to work with Clovis to escape. Under Skywalker's orders, R2-D2 rendezvoused with them and evacuated the area before Embo could land a shot. Using the evidence found in the files, Clovis and Amidala were able to present irrefutable evidence of the Banking Clan's corruption to the Galactic Senate. With the support of both the Senate and Supreme Chancellor Palpatine, Clovis was elected as the new head of the Banking Clan. Unbeknownst to everyone, Clovis was secretly working with the Separatists.

====Escorting Yoda====
thumb|right|250px|R2-D2 in Yoda's starfighter socket.
After the Jedi Grand Master Yoda was contacted through the Force by the deceased Jedi Master Qui-Gon Jinn, R2-D2 accompanied Yoda on a journey to the remote planet of Dagobah. After Skywalker had helped Yoda to escape from the infirmary, he'd assigned R2-D2 to escort Yoda to Dagobah. During the journey, R2 sat in the droid socket of Yoda's fighter. After reaching Dagobah, Yoda received instructions from Qui-Gon to travel to the "Origin-of-Life" to continue his Jedi training.

R2-D2 and Yoda then flew to a mysterious planet which lay in the middle of a cloud of golden energy. Upon entering the cloud, R2-D2 and Yoda's fighter malfunctioned. Trusting in the Force, Yoda manually guided his starfighter to a planet which was generating the golden energy. The starfighter landed near a geyser and Yoda decided to leave R2-D2 behind. He also instructed the astromech droid to guard his lightsaber while he re-entered the starfighter to fly into the geyser. After Yoda completed his trials on the mysterious planet, he received instructions to travel to the ancient Sith homeworld of Moraband.

Upon arriving on Moraband, Yoda instructed R2-D2 to wait with his starfighter once again while he went on to continue his Jedi trials. The Jedi Master also instructed R2-D2 to return alone to Coruscant if he did not return within three days. Yoda managed to complete his trials but experienced visions of the Great Jedi Purge and the rise of the Galactic Empire. After completing his Jedi trials, R2-D2 accompanied him back to Coruscant. However, Yoda declined to share any of his experiences with R2-D2 or his fellow Jedi.

====Battle of Yerbana and reunion with Ahsoka Tano====

|thumb|left|270px|R2 on Yerbana
During the Battle of Yerbana, while Anakin distracted the droids, R2 waited along with Rex and the clone jet troopers of the 501st legion for the signal. When the super tactical droid emerged from hiding, Skywalker gave him the signal and the clones started to attack along with the 212th Attack Battalion.

After Skywalker and Kenobi received a transmission from Ahsoka Tano about the whereabouts of Maul, R2 accompanied them to the hanger to meet with her and members of Lady Bo-Katan Kryze's Mandalore resistance. Upon seeing Tano, the droid happily went over to his old friend, and she patted him on the dome, although this would be the last time they saw each other for a year. R2 was unable to head with Tano to Mandalore, as he, Skywalker, and a force of the 501st were redeployed to Coruscant upon learning General Grievous had kidnapped Chancellor Palpatine, while Tano and Rex would take the newly-formed 332nd Division to combat Maul.

====Battle of Coruscant====

thumb|left|250px|R2 douses a B2 super battle droid in oil
When Chancellor Palpatine was captured by General Grievous, R2-D2 accompanied Skywalker on the rescue mission. While Skywalker and Kenobi searched the Separatist flagship, the ''Invisible Hand'', for the Chancellor, R2-D2 encountered some super battle droids and succeeded in destroying them by spraying oil onto the ground and then igniting it. He then penetrated the Separatist flagship and managed to reunite with Skywalker, Kenobi, and Palpatine. Skywalker had freed the Chancellor and killed Count Dooku. Shortly later, they were captured by General Grievous' droids and taken to the command bridge. Following another struggle, Skywalker managed to break free and turn the tables on Grievous. Defeated, Grievous fled in an escape pod. Hit by Republic fire, the ''Invisible Hand'' began descending into Coruscant, with the Jedi and chancellor in it. However, Skywalker managed to land what was left of the vessel &mdash; but with considerable difficulty. Once on the ground R2-D2 met up with C-3PO &mdash; but, while the group had this initial victory in the Battle of Coruscant, soon the astromech droid would witness the the Great Jedi Purge and the Republic's transformation into the Galactic Empire.

===Age of the Empire===
====Losing Anakin Skywalker====

thumb|right|250px|R2-D2 accompanied the newly-christened Darth Vader to Mustafar but remained outside as his master slaughtered the CIS leadership.
After Anakin Skywalker fell to the dark side and became a Sith apprentice under the name "Darth Vader," R2-D2 continued to accompany him out of loyalty, but he made sure to warn C-3PO of the changing circumstances when they returned to Amidala's apartment aboard their green ''Actis''-class light interceptor. Afterward, R2-D2 accompanied Vader to Mustafar in the starfighter, but the newly-christened Sith ordered his droid to stay behind at the ship when he entered the Klegger Corp Mining Facility to cut down the Executive Separatist Council. After Vader did so and ensured the Separatist Droid Army was shut down, bringing the Clone Wars to an end with a victory for the newly-established Galactic Empire Palpatine transformed the Republic into, R2-D2 was still present as Vader ran out of the facility to reunite with Amidala when she arrived on Mustafar in her J-type Naboo star skiff with C-3PO.

As Vader began to argue with Amidala after Kenobi, having snuck aboard Amidala's ship, revealed himself, R2-D2 watched as his master Force choked his wife, leaving her to fall to the ground. After watching the duel between Kenobi and Vader, R2-D2 was left with the belief that Vader had died and thus left the planet with Kenobi, Amidala, and C-3PO aboard the star skiff, leaving Vader's Actis interceptor abandoned.''Darth Vader'' (2020) 8 They traveled to the Polis Massa asteroid field, where Padmé gave birth to twin children before dying. Following Padmé's death, R2-D2 and C-3PO passed into the service of Bail Organa of the Royal House of Alderaan, Alderaan's Senator and a good friend of the late Amidala. While C-3PO underwent a memory wipe, R2-D2 was allowed to preserve his memories.

====Reunion with Ahsoka Tano====
A year after the end of the Clone Wars, R2-D2 served Captain Raymus Antilles. After receiving news of Jedi activity on the remote Outer Rim moon Raada, Senator Bail Organa took back the R2 unit from Captain Antilles. This Jedi turned out to be R2-D2's old acquaintance Ahsoka Tano, a former Jedi Padawan who had inspired a resistance movement on Raada. Senator Organa assigned R2-D2 to accompany the pilots Chardri Tage and Tamsin on a secret mission to find the Jedi and to rendezvous with his starship ''Tantive IV''. Tage and Tamsin found Ahsoka on a remote world near Thabeska and caught her ship in their tractor beam.''Ahsoka''

thumb|left|150px|Ahsoka Tano (pictured) reunited with R2-D2 a year into Imperial rule.
Believing they were hostile, Tano knocked Tage and Tamsin unconscious. While making her way through the ship's engine room to reach the cockpit, Ahsoka encountered R2-D2 and hugged the astromech droid, having missed his company. Since he had not received a memory wipe, R2-D2 recognized his old friend and told her that he and the pilots were working for a senator who wanted to meet her. At Tano's prompting, R2-D2 told Ahsoka that Bail Organa was the senator. Tano managed to convince R2-D2 to release the tractor beam from her freighter, tell nobody he had met her, and to make sure that she could track his ship. Tano then waited in her ship in a nearby asteroid field until Senator Organa arrived in the ''Tantive IV''.

When Tage and Tamsin awoke, R2-D2 pretended to have been short-circuited by Tano in order to cover up his role in helping her escape. However, Bail realized R2-D2's role in Tano's escape after viewing a clip of the security footage in the engine room. After delivering his report, Tage rendezvoused with the ''Tantive IV'' and returned R2-D2 to his master. R2-D2 was greeted by C-3PO, who berated his companion. When Senator Organa arrived, R2-D2 informed her and left a hatch on the ''Tantive IV'' open. Ahsoka managed to infiltrate the ship with a pressure suit and entered Organa's office.

After Ahsoka informed him about R2-D2's role in her escape, Organa joked that the droid was too independent and ought to be deactivated. Ahsoka responded that R2-D2 had had a lot of "bad role models." When Organa mentioned Anakin Skywalker, Ahsoka clarified she was referring to the late Senator Amidala. After Tano agreed to take part in a mission on Raada to investigate the Inquisitor known as the Sixth Brother, R2-D2 helped Captain Antilles' crew in repairing her damaged freighter. While R2-D2 was repairing the engines, Ahsoka spent time with him and told him that she missed him. When the engines hummed to life, Ahsoka thanked the astromech droid. Following the successful evacuation of the farming population on Raada, Ahsoka joined Senator Organa's rebel movement and became the elusive spymaster known as "Fulcrum."

====Service to Bail Organa====
In 9 BBY, when the young Princess Leia Organa ran off into the woods, R2 was assisting with the repairs in the palace.

====Mission to Garel====

thumb|right|250px|R2-D2 informing Bail Organa about the Spectres.
Five years before the Battle of Yavin, Senator Bail Organa sent R2-D2 and his counterpart, C-3PO to escort the Imperial Minister Maketh Tua and the Aqualish arms dealer Amda Wabo to the planet Garel. Minister Tua wanted to obtain a shipment of T-7 ion disruptor rifles, illicit weapons which had been banned by the Imperial Senate following the brutal pacification of Lasan. She intended to mass-produce the weapons on Lothal, a formerly backwater Outer Rim world that had become a manufacturing base for the Empire. Since Tua could not speak the Aqualish language, C-3PO was assigned the job of acting as her translator. However, R2-D2 was aware about the true nature of their mission: preventing the T-7 ion disruptors from falling into Imperial hands. By contrast, C-3PO was deliberately kept in the dark.

Upon arriving in Lothal, R2-D2 and his companions boarded the Star Commuter 2000 shuttle ST-45, which ferried them to Garel. Unknown to R2-D2, members of a Lothalian rebel cell were also traveling on the same shuttle. Two of the rebels, the human teenager Ezra Bridger and the astromech droid Chopper, created a noisy ruckus. Another rebel, the former Jedi Kanan Jarrus, pretended to be irate and demanded that the petulant Chopper be sent to the back of the shuttle. The pilot complied, but in retaliation, Bridger demanded that Tua's droids be sent to the back as well. Despite Tua's and C-3PO's protests, R2-D2 and his protocol counterpart were forced to move to the rear compartment.

Bereft of a translator, Tua was forced to turn to the Mandalorian girl Sabine Wren, who posed as an Imperial Academy student fluent in Aqualish. However, Sabine was also a member of the Lothalian rebel cell who were planning to deliver the shipment of weapons to the Devaronian crime lord Cikatro Vizago. Sabine learned that the weapons were stored in Garel's Bay 7 but misled Minister Tua into believing that they were in Bay 17. After the shuttle landed in Garel's spaceport, R2-D2 and C-3PO accompanied Minister Tua and a force of stormtroopers to Bay 17. When they found nothing, C-3PO explained that Sabine might have accidentally mistranslated "Bay 7" as "Bay 17."

While traveling to Bay 7, R2-D2 was accosted by Chopper, who had been sent to distract the Imperials. Chopper rammed himself into R2-D2, then shook his arm in apparent anger. In response, R2-D2 whipped out his electro-shock prod, but did not use it as C-3PO ordered him to apologize. But then, Minister Tua recognized Chopper from the shuttle ride to Garel and ordered her stormtrooper guards to hurry to Bay 7. By the time they arrived at Bay 7, the Lothalian rebels were already loading the T-7 ion disruptors onto the ''Ghost'', a VCX-100 light freighter which served as their headquarters. A blaster fight broke out and in the ensuing confusion, R2-D2 and C-3PO fled aboard the ''Ghost'', which fled into hyperspace. The two droids were then taken prisoner by the Lothalian rebels who placed restraining bolts on both of them.

The Spectres then traveled back to Lothal to sell the stolen weapons and the two stowaway droids to Vizago at a pre-arranged rendezvous point. Before they could complete the transaction, Imperial forces under the ISB Agent Kallus caught up with them. Unbeknownst to Chopper and the other crew, C-3PO had contacted the Imperial authorities telling them that he and his astromech counterpart had been kidnapped by a group of "criminals" in Garel. Carrying out Organa's orders, R2-D2 proceeded to overload and destroy the T-7 disruptors with the help of Sabine and Chopper. During the fighting, the rebels managed to destroy the T-7 disruptors and to escape their Imperial pursuers. Following their escape, the crew of the ''Ghost'' rendezvoused with Senator Bail Organa and returned R2-D2 and C-3PO to their rightful owner. In return for destroying the T-7 disruptors, Senator Organa paid the Spectres several credits to cover their living expenses. After the rebels had departed, R2-D2 showed Bail Organa a recording of his time with them.

====Picking up EG-86====
Following the rescue of the Jedi rebel Kanan Jarrus and the Siege of Lothal, R2-D2 was part of an Alderaanian reception party at Havoc Outpost, which greeted the Spectre rebels Wren and Chopper, the bounty hunter Ketsu Onyo and their special cargo: the GNK-series power droid EG-86, who was carrying some secret intelligence of value to the rebel network. R2-D2 whistled when he greeted EG-86, who whistled back in return.

===Hero of the rebellion===
====The Death Star Plans====

thumb|left|250px|R2-D2 and C-3PO watch as the Rebel fleet departs for Scarif.
R2-D2 was with C-3PO at the Rebel Alliance's secret base on Yavin 4 at the time the Alliance Fleet prepared to leave for the Battle of Scarif to help reinforce Rogue One, an unofficial squad that had traveled to Scarif to retrieve the plans for the Galactic Empire's Death Star, a new superweapon capable of destroying entire worlds.''Rogue One: A Star Wars Story''

The Alliance succeeded in stealing the plans for the superweapon. R2-D2 and his protocol counterpart C-3PO were serving Princess Leia Organa's blockade runner ''Tantive IV'', which was being pursued by Darth Vader's ''Imperial''-class Star Destroyer. Senator Organa's adopted daughter Leia was now Alderaan's Senator in the Imperial Senate, one of the last remnants of the Old Republic. During the pursuit, the ''Tantive IV'' was crippled by a laser blast from Vader's ship and Imperial stormtroopers boarded the vessel. After Princess Leia uploaded the secret Death Star plans and a holographic message for Master Kenobi into R2-D2's memory bank, he and C-3PO fled in an escape pod to the desert planet Tatooine.

thumb|right|300px|R2-D2 and C-3PO evade blaster fire between Imperial stormtroopers and Rebellion troops.
After quarreling in the Jundland Wastes, the two droids parted ways. While R2-D2 was traveling past a cave, he was stunned and captured by several Jawas, who took him aboard a sandcrawler. There, he managed to reunite with C-3PO, who had also been captured. During the night, R2-D2 attempted to sabotage an R5 unit named R5-D4 but relented when the astromech droid awoke. Though R5-D4 desired to be sold, R2-D2 told the droid that the fate of the galaxy depended on him being sold and that he needed to find Master Kenobi. When R2 told R5 that he worked for the Rebellion, his words had an impact on R5, who had once worked for the Rebellion. Having established a rapport with the other astromech droid, R2-D2 promised not to trouble R5-D4 for the rest of the journey.

thumb|left|200px|R2-D2 after being captured by Jawas.
The following day, the Jawas visited a moisture farm that was the home of Owen Lars, his wife Beru, and their adopted nephew Luke Skywalker, the son of Anakin Skywalker. Lars bought Threepio and then bought R5-D4. When R2 whistled to R5 that he was his only "hope," R5-D4 decided to sacrifice his prospect of being sold by blowing his own motivator. As a result, Owen bought R2-D2. While Threepio settled down to his new home, R2-D2 wanted to continue his mission to find Master Ben Kenobi. Despite Threepio's objections, R2-D2 escaped one night into the Jundland Wastes. C-3PO and Skywalker followed him in a landspeeder and caught up with R2-D2. However, they were then ambushed by a gang of Tusken Raiders.

During the Tusken attack, R2-D2 hid in a cave. Before the Tusken Raiders could do any more harm, Ben Kenobi arrived and scared them away. After claiming to not recognize R2, he then brought Skywalker, R2-D2, and C-3PO companions to his dwelling. There, Kenobi revealed Skywalker's Jedi heritage and passed him his father's lightsaber, telling the boy that his father Anakin had been murdered by someone named Darth Vader. After Artoo played Princess Leia's message, Kenobi asked Luke to accompany him to Alderaan, Princess Leia's homeworld. Skywalker was initially reluctant until he discovered that Imperial stormtroopers had murdered his relatives and razed their moisture farm. Later, R2-D2 and his companions traveled to the spaceport of Mos Eisley with the intention of finding passage to Alderaan.

Upon arriving in the settlement, they were stopped by a stormtrooper patrol who were hunting for R2-D2 and Threepio. However, Kenobi used a Jedi mind trick to convince the stormtroopers to give them free passage through the town. R2-D2 and C-3PO were denied entry to Chalmun's Spaceport Cantina due to a rule banning droids. While Kenobi and Skywalker negotiated with the smuggler Han Solo and his Wookiee co-pilot Chewbacca, the two droids wandered the streets of Mos Eisley and narrowly evaded a stormtrooper patrol. Later, they boarded Han Solo's ship, the ''Millennium Falcon'' and fled into hyperspace.

====Rescuing the Princess====

As they traveled through hyperspace, R2 sat beside Kenobi, who secretly had recognized R2. Placing his hand on the astromech's dome, Kenobi quietly told R2 he was happy to fly with him once again.''A New Hope: The Princess, the Scoundrel, and the Farm Boy'' Upon arriving in the Alderaan system, R2-D2 and his companions discovered that the Empire had used the Death Star to destroy Alderaan. At that moment, the ''Millennium Falcon'' was captured in the tractor beam of the Death Star. While hiding in the ''Falcon'' smuggling compartment, the rebels managed to ambush an Imperial scanning crew and two stormtroopers who had boarded the ship. The rebels then seized control of an Imperial control room and discovered that Princess Leia was located in Detention Block AA-23, pending execution. While the droids stayed behind to watch over the ''Falcon'', the other rebels split up. While Solo, Luke, and Chewbacca headed to Detention Block AA-23, Kenobi went to disable the Death Star's tractor beam projector.

thumb|right|300px|R2-D2 searching the Death Star database for signs of the Rebels.
Skywalker, Solo, and Chewbacca managed to free the Princess, but their cover was blown and they had to hide in a garbage chute. The Imperials realized that the rebels were trapped in the garbage chute and proceeded to crush the chamber. Meanwhile, Artoo and Threepio escaped an Imperial patrol by claiming that the rebels had thrown them into the storage compartment. Once the Imperials had gone, the two droids were contacted by Skywalker, who ordered them to shut down the garbage compactor. R2-D2 succeeded in shutting down the garbage compactor just in time. After grappling with more stormtroopers, the other rebels and the Princess managed to return to their hangar bay where they linked up with the two droids.

Meanwhile, Master Kenobi had managed to shut down the tractor beam projector but was cornered by his former apprentice Darth Vader on the way back. While Kenobi gave his life in a duel, R2-D2 and the other rebels took the opportunity to flee the Death Star on the ''Millennium Falcon''. After dispatching several pursuing TIE fighters, R2-D2 and his companions escaped to Yavin 4, where the rebels maintained a base. There, they managed to access the Death Star plans stored inside Artoo's memory banks. Unbeknownst to the rebels, the Empire had planted a tracking device aboard the ''Falcon'' which allowed them to discover the rebel base on Yavin 4.

====Battle of Yavin====

R2-D2 and Luke Skywalker participated in the Battle of Yavin. With the Death Star approaching Yavin 4, the rebel leadership ordered a starfighter strike on the battle station. Rebel tacticians had discovered that the Death Star contained one weak point&mdash;a small thermal exhaust port narrow enough for an X-wing fighter to fire a proton torpedo into the space station's reactor core. During the battle, R2-D2 served as the astromech unit aboard Skywalker's X-wing starfighter.

Despite initial successes, the Rebels suffered numerous casualties from the Empire's nimble TIE fighters. Following two failed attempts to penetrate the trench which led to the thermal exhaust port, Skywalker and two other X-wing pilots, Wedge Antilles and Biggs Darklighter, made one final attempt to reach the exhaust port. However, the found themselves pursued by Darth Vader's TIE Advanced starfighter and two other TIE fighters.

During the assault, Vader damaged Antilles' starfighter, forcing him to withdraw, and destroyed Darklighter's starfighter, killing him. Undaunted, Skywalker continued the mission. Vader strafed Skywalker's X-wing and damaged R2-D2, who short-circuited as a result of a direct laser hit. Before Vader could move in for the kill, he was ambushed by Han Solo's ''Millennium Falcon'', which eliminated Vader's wingmen and forced him to disengage. Skywalker then fired the proton torpedoes, which destroyed the Death Star, scoring a major victory for the Rebellion. Following the battle, R2-D2 was repaired and fully restored. The astromech droid later attended a victory celebration where Skywalker, Solo, and other rebel pilots were awarded medals for their combat valor.

====Alderaan's survival====
Following the medal ceremony in the Great Temple, R2-D2 accompanied Leia and the Alderaanian starfighter pilot Evaan Verlaine to the worlds of Naboo, Espirion, and Sullust on a mission to save the survivors of Alderaan. Since General Dodonna had forbidden Princess Leia from leaving Yavin 4, Princess Leia recorded a transmission of R2-D2 recording a message telling the General about her mission to save the Alderaanian refugees scattered across the galaxy. R2-D2 was aboard Leia and Verlaine's T-1 shuttle when Verlaine outran several X-wing starfighters that had been sent to bring them back to Yavin.''Princess Leia'' 1

After landing in the Naboo city of Keren, R2-D2 accompanied Princess Leia and Verlaine when they visited the home of Lord Junn, a wealthy Alderaanian expatriate who provided the group with information about the whereabouts of the Melodic Order. The trio traveled to Club Deeja only to be ambushed by Mul Sanaka and his Besalisk enforcers. R2-D2 used his electric cables to knock out one of the Besalisks. The droid then accompanied his master, Verlaine, and the Melodic Order offworld on a T-1 shuttle and Lord Junn's eponymous yacht.''Princess Leia'' 2

The group then traveled to the planet Sullust to contact Preserver Jora Astane's Alderaan Enclave, who lived underground. R2-D2 accompanied Leia and Verlaine through the caves and tunnels. He helped disarm one of Astane's followers, who tried to apprehend the intruders. In order to convince Jora to trust them, Leia allowed Covis to download data from R2-D2's memory banks including the ''Lord Junn'' weapons profile, navigational history, and transmissions.''Princess Leia'' 3

When Covis intercepted transmissions between the singer Tace and her sister, Tula, who was stationed aboard an Imperial cruiser, Jora thought that Leia and her group were Imperial spies and tried to apprehend them. R2-D2 and the humans escaped down a tunnel hatch which led the den of the rockrenders, large beasts that feasted on metals. Meanwhile, Imperial stormtroopers attacked the Alderaan Enclave upstairs. R2-D2 with the help of Verlaine managed to lure the rockrenders into the Enclave's den. The rockrenders turned the tide of the battle by attacking the stormtroopers, feasting on their mineral rich armor. This gained the trust of Jora's followers and they pledged their allegiance to Princess Leia.

====Salvation over Espirion====
A week later, R2-D2 was present when the rebels obtained a shipment of weapons from the Sullustan Nien Nunb. After Princess Leia undertook a mission to rescue Tace's sister, Tula by pretending to surrender herself to the Empire, R2-D2 accompanied his master on their T-1 shuttle. Prior to landing on the desert world of Skaradosh, Princess Leia told R2-D2 that she would see him on the "other side," leading the others to believe that Princess Leia was planning to die and go to "droid heaven."''Princess Leia'' 4

Leia's surrender turned out to be a ruse. Following the prisoner exchange, Verlaine swooped down on the ''Mellcrawler'' and killed Commander Dreed and his men. R2-D2 and Nien Nunb manned the ''Mellcrawler'' cockpit during the rescue mission. After launching a decoy ship, the group traveled to the planet Espirion where the Alderaan Flotilla had gathered after learning of Leia's mission to gather them. When Dreed's subordinate Venk attacked the flotilla, R2-D2 beamed Leia's speech directly to the Alder-Espirion Chief Beon Beonel. Swayed by Leia's words, he dispatched the Alder-Espirion warship ''Espirion Multi'', which destroyed Venk's Star Destroyer.''Princess Leia'' 5

Following the battle above Espirion, R2-D2 attended the victory celebrations where Princess Leia learnt that her droid had beamed her speech directly to Chief Beonel. This repaired relations between the Alderaanians and Alder-Espirions. R2-D2 then accompanied his Princess back to Yavin 4 to continue fighting for the Rebellion. Upon landing, R2-D2 reunited with C-3PO while Leia chatted with Han, Luke, and Chewbacca.

====Weapons Factory Alpha====

Several weeks after the Battle of Yavin, R2-D2 took part in the Rebel Assault on Cymoon. Cymoon 1 was a moon in the Corellian Industrial Cluster, that housed the largest weapons factory in the galaxy&mdash;Weapons Factory Alpha. The factory was also the main target of the assault. R2-D2, Luke Skywalker, Princess Leia Organa, and Han Solo boarded a shuttle that had been intercepted by the Rebel Fleet several days earlier. The shuttle was sent from the crime lord Jabba the Hutt, and had housed an envoy that was to negotiate with the Empire. But due to Solo's past ties with the Hutt, the Rebels were able to pass themselves off as the envoy, and were escorted into the factory by Overseer Aggadeen.

thumb|left|300px|R2-D2 begins the assault on Weapons Factory Alpha.
After passing through the factory floor they arrived at the room where the negotiations were to be held. The Overseer invited them in to await the negotiator, but Han revealed that they weren't there to negotiate and gave R2-D2 the signal. R2-D2 began pouring a green liquid onto the floor, he then he electrocuted the fluid with his electric pike. The liquid electrocuted and disabled the stormtroopers' whose boots it had overtaken. Luke, Han, and Leia then finished off the remaining troopers. Han asked Aggadeen where the main power core was, but the proud Imperial officer refused to answer &mdash; until R2-D2 threatened to electrocute him too. Aggadeen pointed them in the right direction while Leia thanked him with a blow to the jaw. They arrived at the power core, where R2 plugged into the main computer and shut off all the safety restraints. Soon they had rigged the core to blow up in ten minutes' time. Han noticed that Luke was missing, but a minute later he arrived with more passengers &mdash; slaves of the Empire. The team prepared to retreat while C-3PO, who was waiting with the ''Millennium Falcon'' in the huge refuse fields that surrounded the factory, brought the ''Falcon'' in to pick them up for their escape. Chewbacca, who was stationed on a large metal structure overlooking the landing platform where they had originally entered, reported that Darth Vader, the Dark Lord of the Sith, had arrived. Leia ordered the wookiee to kill Vader using his bowcaster. The wookiee tried but was thwarted by the dark lord. Chewbacca was out of contact, the entire moon was on alert and C-3PO still hadn't arrived. Soon, C-3PO informed the team via comlink that the old freighter was being dismantled by native scavengers, and as such, the ''Falcon's'' autopilot was out of order. Han realized their escape had been foiled and led the team&mdash;with slaves in tow, to a large warehouse that housed several newly minted All Terrain Armored Transports walkers. Han ordered everyone on board, they were going to walk right out of the factory.

Han, Leia, and several slaves boarded the walker. Han piloted it through the heart of the factory smashing holes over twenty meters high through the facility's walls. Luke reappeared after confronting Vader and bid the slaves to follow him as he followed Han in the AT-AT. Meanwhile R2-D2 and his former enemies, the Jawas, began rewiring the walker's laser cannons to get them operational. Han was arguing about their chances of death with Vader on their tail; Han asked the astromech on their progress. R2-D2, replied but Han did not understand the droid language of Binary. Han believed R2-D2 and the Jawas would get the cannons working&mdash;they just needed to give them the time. A short time later, Han attempted to step on Darth Vader with the AT-AT's massive feet. Vader used the dark side of the Force to hold the walker's foot several meters above himself and the ground&mdash;Han couldn't believe it. Vader began to crush the armored transport using the force, Han told R2-D2 "We need those guns!" R2-D2 spoke in his customary beeps and clicks; which Leia translated to "Fire!" The AT-AT opened fire on the Sith Lord and the factory walls as Han drove out of the facility. Leia was so happy she wanted to kiss the little droid&mdash;much to Han's annoyance.''Star Wars'' (2015) 2

thumb|right|200px|Leia hugging R2 after they seemingly escaped Vader.
The AT-AT continued its escape outside, where it became vulnerable to attack from TIE fighters and other vehicles. Han and Leia realized that it had been too long &mdash; the factory should have melted down and exploded before this time. Chewbacca survived Vader's attack and returned to the ''Falcon'', and was preparing to bring it in and extract the team. However, Vader was right beneath the walker, using his lightsaber to cut through the back left leg of the AT-AT. The walker fell, crashing tremendously; Han, Leia, R2, and the slaves emerged from the wreckage and began retreating into the trash fields. Luke, mounted on a 74-Z speeder bike, returned to the factory and fired upon the core reactor &mdash; causing the facility to explode. While Vader and the Imperials were distracted Chewbacca swooped in with Han's ''Falcon'' and everyone boarded the freighter. Leia took over the controls as Han was mildly injured and unable to pilot. Chewbacca repaired the hyperdrive and they fled to lightspeed. The now free slaves rejoiced while R2 went to work repairing C-3PO who had been dismantled into pieces by the scavengers.''Star Wars'' (2015) 3

====To Tatooine with Luke====

thumb|left|250px|R2 and Luke leave Red Five, and head towards Kenobi's home
Later, the ''Millennium Falcon'' and its passengers rendezvoused with the Rebel fleet''Star Wars'' (2015) 4 on the edge of the galaxy. While the team recovered and was debriefed, R2 and 3PO argued over whether R2 had incorrectly assembled 3PO after escaping Darth Vader on Cymoon 1. Soon thereafter, R2 boarded Luke's T-65B X-wing to leave the Rebel fleet. Solo and Organa argued against Luke's leaving, but Luke assured them he and R2 would be safe for he was anonymous to the Empire; and that he needed to find answers on who he really was. At Luke's request, Artoo set course to again go to Tatooine in the Tatoo system.

Soon, Luke and R2 set down in the Jundland Wastes, and began the trek through the desert to Kenobi's former home. The suns were setting when they neared the hut, while Luke divulged in his reasoning for returning; nearly everything he knew about the Force he had learned from Ben Kenobi, and he believed that he sometimes heard the disembodied voice of the Jedi Master. However, Luke was interrupted when a Tusken Raider appeared and attacked him. R2 readied his electric pike, but did not have to use it, because at familiar sight of Luke's lightsaber, they ran. Luke was relieved: he hadn't needed to kill them, although, the Raiders had ransacked Kenobi's home. R2 went to work with his flashlight to locate anything Kenobi may have left to aid Luke in his journey to learn the Jedi way. While searching, Luke openly wondered why Kenobi had chosen to stay on Tatooine after all he had experienced. R2 knew it was to protect Luke from the Sith, until he was of age to become a Jedi &mdash; although, following Kenobi's lead, he did not tell the former-farmboy. Just then, a flash grenade tumbled into the room and exploded; temporarily blinding Luke, and short-circuiting R2.

thumb|right|240px|Fett falling backwards over R2
While R2's systems rebooted, Luke fought Boba Fett, a bounty hunter sent by Darth Vader to capture Luke and bring him to the Dark Lord&mdash;although it was unknown to both Luke and Artoo at the time. Luke used his lightsaber and knocked Fett backwards where he tripped over R2. The two combatants, Fett with his Mandalorian armor, and Luke with the Force &mdash; though still blind &mdash; fought. Luke became more bloodied, and Fett more impatient. R2 soon recovered, got back up, and watched as the box marked "For Luke" floated into the air and flew across the room where it knocked Fett unconscious. Luke wondered aloud how he had done it, before asking R2-D2 to lead them back to the X-wing, for he was still unable to see. Later, as Tatooine's suns rose over the desert, Luke had recovered enough of his sight to open the box and examine its contents: "The Journals of Ben Kenobi." They then left the desert world.''Star Wars'' (2015) 6

====The Smuggler's Moon====

Following their departure from Tatooine, Luke read an excerpt from Ben's Journal''Star Wars'' (2015) 7 while R2-D2 navigated. Frustrated by the journal's lack of proper Jedi training, Luke plotted a course for Nar Shaddaa in order to gain passage to Coruscant, intent on locating the Jedi Temple there. Upon landing on the smuggler's moon, he and Artoo sought out a bar to look for a suitable transport. Entering the bar, he explained his case to all the bar patrons. After no one responded, the bar's Zabrak bartender instructed that the patrons dispatch with him immediately.

R2-D2 could only look on as Luke attempted to fight them off, but the brawl abruptly ended when he ignited his lightsaber. The Zabrak explained that he could ensure passage if Luke handed over his lightsaber as payment, which Luke refused to do. As the deal began to fall apart, an alien bar patron stole Luke's lightsaber using their magna-glove and took off, with Luke and the entire bar giving chase.

thumb|left|319x319px|R2-D2 catches up to Luke.
While jumping over rooftops in an effort to catch the lightsaber thief, Luke contacted R2 over his comlink, saying that they needed to get his lightsaber back as it was the only link he had to the Jedi. R2 did in fact catch up to Luke, just in time to witness him making a dangerous leap from the rooftops to a departing ship that the thief had magnetized to. Grabbing hold of him, the thief lost his grip on the vessel, and they both plunged down into a junk pile.''Star Wars'' (2015) 9

Luke recuperated quickly, reclaiming his lightsaber and leaving the thief in a daze. Inquiring R2 as to why the bar patrons had seemingly given up chasing after them, Grakkus the Hutt and two of his magnaguards arrived on the scene, explaining that since Luke was now in Hutta Town, he and his lightsaber now belonged to Grakkus; Luke attempted to resist capture, but Grakkus' magnaguards made short work of him. R2-D2 made himself scarce and avoided capture, following Luke to Grakkus' palace and plotting to break him out. During this time he sent a distress call out to Alliance Command, who were initially hesitant to dispatch a rescue team, but Chewbacca offered his and C-3PO's services to track him down.''Star Wars'' (2015) 9

thumb|right|324x324px|R2-D2 sneaks into Grakkus' Palace.
At this point, Han Solo, Princess Leia, and an unwilling Sana Starros joined the rescue effort. While C-3PO calculated the odds of infiltrating the palace as being utterly impossible, R2-D2 simply blended in with the crowd and entered the palace unnoticed. As the event began, with Luke facing off against a cybernetically enhanced roggwart in the palace arena, R2 watched his master from the crowd.''Star Wars'' (2015) 11

thumb|left|217x217px|Artoo ejects four lightsabers from his dome.
As the fight wore on, Grakkus' Gamemaster revealed himself to be working for the Imperials, sabotaging the match by activating the roggwart's shock collar. As Grakkus' magnaguards were gunned down by an invasion of Imperial forces, R2 slipped away to the Hutt's collection room of Jedi artifacts and located Luke's lightsaber, in addition to several others on a table. Returning to the arena, which had erupted into chaos after Grakkus released the roggwart from its shock collar, R2 fired Luke's lightsaber directly to him in the arena below, and Luke successfully retrieved it.''Star Wars'' (2015) 12

Han, Leia, and Chewbacca easily infiltrated the now defenseless palace, and after narrowly avoiding the rampaging roggwart was reunited with R2, who promptly revealed that he had stolen four more lightsabers. As Grakkus had rendered all blasters useless with a localized E.M.P. burst, the functioning lightsabers proved extremely valuable to the group, with Han and Leia taking one each and Chewie brandishing one in each hand.''Star Wars'' (2015) 12

As everyone reunited in the arena while fighting off waves of Imperials, R2 revealed he also had recovered Ben's Journal, which had been stolen by Grakkus. Luke wanted to go back to the Jedi artifact room, but more stormtroopers with working blasters entered the arena so they made a hasty retreat to rendezvous with the ''Millennium Falcon'' and the ''Volt Cobra'', leaving the smuggler's moon behind.''Star Wars'' (2015) 12

====Battle of Vrogas Vas====

Sometime after regrouping with the Rebel fleet, R2-D2 accompanied Luke as part of Red Squadron to the secret rebel refueling base on Vrogas Vas. Luke was also there to investigate the possibility of the planet's ties to the Jedi. During a maneuvering drill in space with Blue and Yellow Squadrons, Darth Vader in his TIE Advanced dropped out of hyperspace directly in front of the group. Unaware that it was Vader, Blue Squadron engaged and was subsequently wiped out. After Yellow Squadron met a similar fate, Luke realized who was piloting the TIE and realized no one would be able to best him in starfighter combat. Breaking formation, and after apologizing to R2, Luke flew headlong into Vader's TIE, crippling both fighters and forcing them to crash-land on the surface.

thumb|right|291x291px|R2-D2 protects Luke.
Luke and R2-D2 came out of their crash unscathed, and began making their way back to base; searching for traces of the Jedi would have to wait for another time. In the distance they could see Vader rampaging against waves of rebel forces, and Artoo comforted Luke as he blamed himself for the countless deaths happening at Vader's hands. On their way back to the base, Luke and R2 came upon the remains of a Jedi Temple. As Luke tried to make sense of what he thought was a Force vision, they were discovered by C-3PO. R2-D2 tried to warn Luke, but it was too late; with Luke's back turned, Threepio revealed himself to be 0-0-0, the protocol droid working for Doctor Aphra who specialized in torture, and incapacitated Luke with an intense shock to his shoulder.''Darth Vader'' (2015) 13

R2-D2 tried to protect his master from Aphra and her droids. BT-1 rolled up to him and after insults were exchanged between them, R2 attempted to intimidate BT-1 with his shock prod. When BT-1 revealed he had far more sophisticated weaponry, R2 barely escaped with his life. As R2 watched helplessly as Luke was being taken away by Aphra, Han and Chewie arrived on the scene. Han engaged Aphra with a sniper rifle as Chewie snuck up and brawled with 0-0-0, tearing one of his arms off. Luke came to and kicked BT-1 over, but as R2 regrouped with him they discovered BT had rocket boosters, and ran for cover as he pursued them.''Star Wars'' (2015) 13

thumb|left|341x341px|R2-D2 sprays oil on BT-1's face.
Meanwhile, Han had successfully incapacitated Aphra (and himself). Temporarily eluding BT-1, Luke cut off Triple-Zero's other arm with his lightsaber after the protocol droid had injected Chewbacca with 500 mg of Mandalorian xenotox. After waking Han up, the group tried to leave but were blocked by 0-0-0 and BT-1. This time, however, R2-D2 had a different trick up his sleeve. Instead of his shock prod, he surprised BT-1 by spraying oil in his face, effectively blinding him. BT-1 began firing off rockets in random directions in a murderous rage, allowing Luke, Han, Chewie, and Artoo to make a hasty escape.

Making it back to the ''Millennium Falcon'', Han said an antidote for the poison in Chewbacca was on the ship, and Luke instructed R2-D2 to administer it. Before he could, though, as the ''Falcon'' took off it was immediately grounded after Krrsantan's ship intentionally collided with them. Krrsantan blew a hole into the cockpit and extracted Luke, but was attacked by Chewbacca. Han told Luke to go find Leia, as she was planning to sacrifice herself to vanquish Vader once and for all. At the same time, Leia sent C-3PO to regroup with their friends.''Darth Vader'' (2015) 14

thumb|right|220x220px|R2-D2 fires a syringe from a body compartment.
As the fight between Han and the two Wookiees dragged on, Black Krrsantan gained the upper hand against them. R2 hadn't given Chewbacca his antidote yet and couldn't get close to the brawl, but luckily he had loaded it into his casing and fired it at Chewbacca's leg. Immediately taking effect, Chewbacca roared and launched a successful counterattack against Krrsantan.''Star Wars'' (2015) 14

C-3PO had met difficulties on the way to the ''Millennium Falcon'', in the form of 0-0-0 and BT-1. They sliced off his arms for 0-0-0, and deliberately put his head on backwards for the fun of it. Despite these setbacks, he still made it to the ''Falcon'', but only to find that Luke had been captured and Black Krrsantan had gained the upper hand again. R2-D2 held out a comlink for 3PO to update Leia on their circumstances, who reluctantly agreed to withdraw from the duel she was witnessing between Vader and Commander Karbin in order to help them.''Darth Vader'' (2015) 15

C-3PO called on Black Krrsantan to stop fighting, which unwittingly worked as when Krrsantan instead punched him in the chest, his fried circuits connected with Krrsantan's brass knuckles, electrocuting and knocking out both of them. Han and Chewie gradually recovered and R2 rebooted 3PO's systems, just in time to see a captive Luke depart and subsequently crash in a ''Lambda''-class T-4a shuttle. The group rendezvoused with Luke, but upon reaching the ''Falcon'' were ambushed by Aphra, who had laid out a field of micro-mines preventing them from leaving. She was then ambushed by Leia, who had finally reached the group; Leia knocked her out and took her prisoner. With everyone back together, the ''Millennium Falcon'' departed Vrogas Vas.

====At Sunspot Prison====
thumb|left|278x278px|C-3PO and R2-D2 held hostage at Sunspot Prison.
Sometime following the events on Vrogas Vas, R2-D2 alongside C-3PO escorted Leia and Sana Starros aboard the ''Volt Cobra'', as they brought Doctor Aphra to be incarcerated at the highly secret Sunspot Prison, a facility closely orbiting a star. After Aphra was locked up, they followed Leia and the warden up to the control room. Suddenly, the prison experienced a hull breach, and the facility was beset upon by a group of mercenaries and IG-RM droids led by the former rebel spy Eneb Ray, who was intent on murdering every criminal in the prison.''Star Wars'' (2015) 16

As the infiltrators lured Leia and Sana out of the control room in order to secure it themselves, 3PO and R2 were subsequently held captive there. Meanwhile, Leia and Sana rescued Aphra from being executed by an IG-RM droid, and recruited her to help take back the facility.''Star Wars'' (2015) 17 They worked their way through the facility, eventually reaching the control room. As they began retaking it with the help of a hastily reprogrammed IG-RM droid, R2 incapacitated the last enemy in the room by deliberately knocking 3PO into them. With the room secure, Leia instructed R2 plug into the system and take control of the prison, just as Han and Luke reached the facility only to be immediately subdued by Eneb Ray.''Star Wars'' (2015) 18

thumb|right|278x278px|R2-D2 sets off an ion pulse at Sunspot Prison.
Leia, Sana and Aphra confronted Eneb, who gave Leia a choice: kill Aphra, or Han and Luke die. Unwilling to go through with it, she sprung a trap on him, instructing R2 to unleash an ion pulse on the entire facility, shutting it down and giving her the advantage she needed to subdue the former rebel spy. Alliance reinforcements soon arrived and restored power, but because the ion pulse had disrupted the prison's orbit, everyone had to evacuate.''Star Wars'' (2015) 19

====Rescue of C-3PO====
Following the Hijacking of the Harbinger and C-3PO's capture, R2, worried about his friend, decided to stage a rescue mission. Before he left, he had Chewbacca upgrade his weapons systems. He takes an X-Wing and jumps to Threepio's coordinates.''Star Wars'' (2015) 26 After arriving he powered down his ship and let himself be taken by the Destroyer. After taking out an inspection team, R2 made his way to a terminal and found out where C-3PO was held. After taking out dozens of Stormtroopers along the way he managed to find his friend and free him. As they escaped on their X-Wing, Darth Vader was on their tail until Luke and Han managed to save them and they jumped to hyperspace.''Star Wars'' (2015) 36

===The Galactic Civil War's final phase===
====Battle of Hoth====

thumb|left|250px|R2-D2 moves about Echo Base as the Battle of Hoth begins.
Later, the Rebel Alliance established a base on the remote icy planet of Hoth and R2-D2 followed his companions there. When Luke Skywalker failed to return from a snow patrol, Han Solo traveled out on another tauntaun to rescue him. When both men did not return that night, R2-D2 calculated that they had a poor chance of surviving in the frozen wilderness. Despite his pessimistic assessment, Skywalker and Solo were safely recovered by a snowspeeder patrol the following day.

Later, the rebels were forced to evacuate Hoth after Solo and Chewbacca encountered an Imperial probe droid. However, Darth Vader's fleet blockaded the planet; preventing the rebels from leaving. The Rebels managed to penetrate the Imperial blockade by using an ion cannon to clear away for their ships to flee into hyperspace. As the battle began, R2-D2 was moving about Echo Base and reacted to the news of incoming AT-ATs before a small piece of snow broke off from the ceiling, landing on his dome. Following the ground assault, R2-D2 and his master, Skywalker left Hoth in an X-wing fighter.

====Detour to Dagobah====

Instead of rendezvousing with the rest of the Rebel fleet, Skywalker traveled to Dagobah, a remote swampy world. Earlier, Skywalker had been visited by a Force spirit of Master Kenobi who told him to visit Dagobah where the Jedi Master Yoda would continue his Jedi training. After a rough landing, R2-D2 was nearly eaten by a dragonsnake, but was later spat out. R2 suffered little serious damage but was muddy and dented.

thumb|right|180px|R2-D2 covered in mud after surviving his encounter with the dragonsnake.
Shortly after, the two companions encountered a small green creature, who promised to take them to Master Yoda. R2-D2 didn't seem to have a good first impression of Yoda and appeared to tussle with him until Skywalker intervened. While Skywalker visited the creature's hut, R2-D2 guarded the X-wing starfighter. Heavy rainfall compelled R2-D2 to follow them, but ended up peering through an open window as he likely couldn't fit through the doorway. After the green creature revealed himself as Master Yoda, Skywalker began his Jedi training. R2-D2 observed the training from a distance. On one occasion, R2-D2 was present when Yoda used the Force to levitate Skywalker's X-wing starfighter from the swamp.

On another training exercise, Luke Skywalker, under Yoda's instruction, used the Force to levitate R2-D2 and several rocks. However, Skywalker was distracted by a vision of his friend Han, Leia, and Chewbacca being tortured in a "city in the clouds." Despite Yoda and Kenobi's warnings, Skywalker decided to adjourn his Jedi training and leave Dagobah to rescue his companions, but vowed to return and complete his training. Unknown to Luke and R2-D2, the vision was a trap created by Darth Vader to lure the young Jedi into a trap. R2-D2 and Luke traveled to Cloud City, a floating city which lay in the gas giant Bespin.

====Rendezvous at Bespin====

thumb|left|300px|R2-D2 sprays smoke at incoming stormtroopers to cover his friend's escape
After landing without any problems, the two entered the complex. While walking through Cloud City, R2-D2 and Luke caught a glimpse of Princess Leia and their companions being taken away by several Imperial stormtroopers. R2-D2 was separated from Luke after the latter ascended up a turbolift which led him to a carbon-freezing chamber. Later, R2-D2 managed to link up with C-3PO, Leia, and Chewbacca, who had all been freed by Lando. Lando had earlier betrayed his friend Han Solo, but then in a change of heart, decided to help the rebels escape the Empire. Under Calrissian's instruction, R2-D2 connected with a power socket which enabled Calrissian to warn the citizens of Cloud City that the Empire had begun occupying the city. After fighting several stormtroopers, R2-D2 and his companions managed to escape Cloud City on the ''Millennium Falcon''.

After picking up the wounded Skywalker, who had lost his hand in combat against Darth Vader, R2-D2 and his companions fled into space. However, they were pursued by Darth Vader's Super Star Destroyer ''Executor''. While reattaching Threepio's legs, R2-D2 was forced to attend to the ship's hyperdrive, which had been disabled by the Imperials. R2-D2 managed to repair the hyperdrive in the nick of time and the ''Falcon'' was able to flee into hyperspace and rejoin the Rebel fleet. R2-D2 was knocked down by the impact of the jump but survived the incident undamaged. Later, he, along with C-3PO, Leia, and Skywalker, watched while Lando and Chewie departed on the ''Millennium Falcon'' to find Han Solo.

====Traveling with Skywalker====
R2 accompanied Skywalker on his mission to Serelia. There, the droid saved his master from being drowned by the ex-Jedi acolyte Verla after she discovered Darth Vader claimed Luke was his son.''Star Wars'' (2020) 6

====Scourge====
R2 was aboard Home One when he met up with his friend C-3PO, unknown to him that he was infected by the Scourge. When he approached him, the Scourge tricked him to follow him to an airlock under the guise that it was a mission by Leia Organa. When he got closer, the Scourge-controlled C-3PO ripped out his data probe and damaged his dome. Soon after, he was ejected out of the ship.''Dark Droids'' 2

After realizing his best friend had been infected, R2-D2 set out to rescue his friend from this new threat to the galaxy. He started by reforming the D-Squad he had been in during the Clone Wars, briefly reuniting with WAC-47''Dark Droids: D-Squad'' 1 before forming the squad with Aphra's droids 0-0-0 and BT-1 and droid bounty hunters 4-LOM and IG-88B. Afterward, he reunited with fellow former D-Squad member QT-KT.''Dark Droids: D-Squad'' 3 Together, the new D-Squad found the warrior-priest droid Ajax Sigma,''Dark Droids: D-Squad'' 4 who led D-Squad on a successful mission to defeat the Scourge.''Dark Droids'' 5

====Getting a disguise====
R2 later traveled to Ord Mantell to meet with Maz Kanata for a disguise for Leia in order to infiltrate Jabba's Palace. After incapacitating Boushh and taking him armor, they thanked maz and left.

====Rescuing Han Solo====

Later, R2-D2 and his companions learned that Han Solo was being held by Jabba on Tatooine. Skywalker informed R2-D2 about his plan to rescue Han Solo but kept C-3PO in the dark, knowing that his programming prevented him from lying. As planned, R2-D2 and C-3PO traveled to Jabba's castle where R2-D2 played a holographic message from Luke Skywalker. Skywalker offered to give R2-D2 and C-3PO as a "gift" to Jabba in return for freeing Han. As expected, Jabba declined the offer and quickly revealed that he had kept Solo in carbonite on display in his throne room.

However, he took the two droids anyway. While C-3PO became Jabba's new translator, R2-D2 was pressed into service as a waiter aboard Jabba's sail barge ''Khetanna''. Later, Leia, disguised as the bounty hunter Boushh, visited Jabba with the captive Chewbacca in tow. However, this was merely a ruse to free Han Solo. Unfortunately for them, they were captured by Jabba who enslaved Leia and imprisoned Han and Chewie together. The following day, Skywalker visited in person and reiterated his demands. Jabba refused and threw Luke into the rancor pit. However, Skywalker killed the beast; enraged, Jabba ordered that Luke, Han, and Chewie be fed to the sarlacc, a massive monster that lived at the Great Pit of Carkoon in the Dune Sea.

thumb|right|250px|R2-D2 serving drinks on Jabba's sail barge.
While traveling to the Dune Sea, R2-D2 was serving drinks when he bumped into C-3PO, who expressed despondence at the situation. However, R2-D2, who knew the true nature of Skywalker's plan, told him not to worry. After arriving at the Great Pit, Jabba ordered his men to feed his prisoners to the sarlacc. Luke was forced to walk the plank, but before jumping he signaled to R2. The astromech droid launched Skywalker's lightsaber to him and the Jedi promptly freed his companions and overpowered Jabba's thugs on the nearby desert skiff. Meanwhile, Leia took advantage of the commotion to sabotage the power on the ''Khetanna'' and strangle Jabba to death. R2-D2 also freed Leia and came to C-3PO's defense, when he was accosted by Jabba's pet Kowakian monkey-lizard Salacious Crumb.

After freeing Leia, R2-D2 and C-3PO dove into the Dune sea where they were picked up by their companions. They then fled the scene on a stolen desert skiff and went off-world. While C-3PO and the others departed on the ''Millennium Falcon'' to rendezvous with the Rebel fleet near the Sullust system, R2-D2 and Skywalker traveled to Dagobah. This trip was more pleasant for R2-D2, who guarded Skywalker's X-wing while the Jedi visited Yoda. The dying Yoda affirmed that Luke's father, Anakin Skywalker and Darth Vader were the same person, before passing on. Later, Skywalker met the Force spirit of Kenobi who warned him of his final trial with Vader.

====Battle of Endor====

thumb|left|250px|R2 gets blasted by enemy fire during the battle of Endor
After rescuing Han Solo, R2-D2 and his companions participated in a rebel mission to destroy the second Death Star that was being built above the Forest Moon of Endor. Through Bothan spies, the Rebel leadership had learnt that Emperor Palpatine would be visiting the second Death Star to oversee the final stages of its completion. In response, the Rebel leader Mon Mothma and Admiral Ackbar had marshaled the Rebel fleet for a massive strike against the Imperial leadership. Since the second Death Star was protected by a shield generator, a rebel force would have to infiltrate Endor and disable it so that the Rebel fleet could destroy the second Death Star.

R2-D2 along with his companions C-3PO, Han Solo, Princess Leia, Luke Skywalker, and Chewbacca took part in the mission to infiltrate Endor. Using a stolen Imperial shuttle, the rebels managed to land on Endor. They soon encountered several Imperial scout troopers and Princess Leia was separated from the group during the struggle. R2-D2 accompanied Han, Skywalker, and Chewbacca as they search through the forest for Leia. However, they stumbled into a net trap. Using his electrical saw, R2-D2 managed to free his companions. They were then surrounded by several Ewoks, a species of furry bipeds native to Endor. Believing that C-3PO was a god, the Ewoks attempted to sacrifice Solo, Skywalker, Chewbacca, and R2-D2. When C-3PO failed to dissuade the Ewoks, Skywalker used the Force to cause C-3PO's throne to levitate. Fearing that they had angered their "god," the Ewoks promptly released their prisoners.

After convincing the Ewoks to fight on their side, R2-D2 and C-3PO took part in the Rebel assault on the Death Star's shield generator the following day. However, the rebel force was quickly captured by the Imperial garrison &mdash; although R2-D2 and C-3PO managed to evade capture. Under orders from R2-D2, C-3PO exposed his position to the Imperials. Shortly later, the Ewoks attacked the Imperial forces massed outside the shield generator. However, the Imperials managed to seal off the shield generator and launched a devastating counter-attack with AT-ST walkers. Meanwhile in space, the Rebel fleet was trapped between the second Death Star and an Imperial fleet.

thumb|right|250px|R2-D2 and his companions celebrating the Rebel victory at Endor.
During the fighting, R2-D2 and C-3PO made their way to the shield generator's blast door where Han and Leia were attempting to breach it. R2-D2 attempted to access the power socket, but was blasted by enemy fire, causing him to short-circuit. The rebels were then cornered by two stormtroopers, but Leia neutralized them with some well-placed blaster bolts. Meanwhile, Chewbacca and two Ewok warriors managed to turn the tide of the battle by hijacking an AT-ST walker and using it to destroy the others. Using the hijacked AT-ST, the rebels tricked the remaining Imperial troops into opening the shield generator. After storming the bunker, the rebels planted explosives which destroyed the energy field protecting the Death Star. This enabled the Rebels to destroy the second Death Star along with Emperor Palpatine, Darth Vader, and several Imperial ships. Following the Battle of Endor, R2-D2 was repaired and took part in the victory celebrations at Bright Tree Village.

===After Endor===
====At Luke Skywalker's side====
At some point following the Battle of Endor, Luke sought out an ancient compass created by the ancient Jedi Order. R2-D2 accompanied Luke to Pillio, where the compass was located, but remained with Luke's X-wing while his master found the compass.''Star Wars Battlefront II''

R2-D2 accompanied Luke and Shara Bey on a mission to obtain two Force-sensitive trees that sprouted from the one planted in the Jedi Temple training ground. The trees were stored in an Imperial base on Vetine, and Luke had Bey impersonate an Imperial Security Bureau officer, Alecia Beck, to enter the facility, and had R2-D2 stash his lightsaber. This did not fool Commandant Hurron, who knew Beck had a prosthetic eye, so R2-D2 ejected the lightsaber for Luke to fight their way out and escape with the trees.''Shattered Empire'' 4

thumb|left|300px|R2-D2 met a member of Yoda's species, Grogu, before the departing from an Imperial remnant cruiser with the child and his master.
Sometime later, R2-D2 joined Luke in retrieving a Force-sensitive child of Yoda's species named Grogu from Moff Gideon's light cruiser. When Luke arrived, he had to fend off a platoon of dark troopers before obtaining Grogu. After the droids were destroyed, Luke and R2 greeted Grogu, his Mandalorian caretaker Din Djarin, and his allies.

R2 then accompanied his master and Grogu to Ossus, where Luke started building his Jedi Academy. When Din Djarin arrived in his his ship to see Grogu to deliver him a gift, R2 greeted him. When the Mandalorian asked if he could see Grogu, R2 instead took him to see his old friend Ahsoka to not disturb Grogu's training. When Skywalker gave Grogu the option to end his Jedi training and return to being under Djarin's care, Grogu decided to leave, and R2 brought him to Tatooine, landing at Peli Motto's hangar.

====New Jedi Order====
Luke spent the subsequent decades rebuilding the Jedi Order,''Star Wars: The Force Awakens'' novelization and R2-D2 was with Skywalker at his Jedi temple. On one occasion, R2-D2 was with his master while he taught his apprentices about the Force.''The Rise of Kylo Ren'' 3 R2-D2 joined Skywalker and Lando Calrissian during their quest for Exegol, where they attempted to save a small family being chased by the assassin Ochi of Bestoon. Ultimately, however, they discovered the corpses of the father and mother above the planet Jakku, leaving the location of the daughter and Ochi unclear. R2-D2 joined Calrissian, Skywalker, and their ally Komat in laying the father and mother to rest on the world of Neftali. Skywalker and Calrissian managed to track Ochi's ship, the ''Bestoon Legacy'', to the planet Pasaana, where they found the ship abandoned,''Shadow of the Sith'' leaving the trail to go cold for years.

thumb|300px|Luke places his hand on R2, following the destruction of the temple.
Ultimately, Skywalker's dream of a New Jedi Order was destroyed. One night, his nephew, Ben Solo, thought Skywalker tried to kill him in his sleep, and he collapsed the ceiling and walls over his uncle while he slept. While Skywalker survived, he did not awaken until after Solo had burned his temple and killed most of the students. Skywalker believed that Solo had slaughtered the dead and taken the survivors with him, but did not witness the lightning storm that destroyed the temple or know the surviving students had pursued Solo.''The Rise of Kylo Ren'' 1 Solo ultimately fell to the dark side and took on the name "Kylo Ren". After Skywalker awoke and emerged from the rubble, R2-D2 was present at his side, and the Jedi Master placed his hand on his trusted astromech as he knelt and wept.''Star Wars: The Force Awakens'' novelization

====Locating Luke Skywalker====

After Luke went into exile, R2-D2 went into a self-imposed low-power mode in order to recuperate from decades of uninterrupted operation, having not operated at peak efficiency for several years prior. In a sort of semi-retirement, his celebrated status in the early Rebellion protected him from becoming spare parts as newer and more advanced droid models had become the norm for starship support duty. Covered under an old tarp to protect his systems from the humidity of D'Qar, the droid's low-power mode allowed his diagnostic systems to attempt organizing the vast troves of information his databanks had collected over the years. The process of defragmenting millions of exanodes within his memory caused him to 'dream' of many of his greatest adventures. Despite being unresponsive, his longtime companion C-3PO still talked and fussed over him on a regular basis, and even found ways to argue with him.

Shortly after the attack on Starkiller Base, he overheard a young Force-sensitive named Rey, who had recently joined the Resistance and was, unknown to all, the missing daughter from Skywalker and Calrissian's search for Exegol from years earlier, stating that the First Order had recovered the majority of the starchart that was recovered from the Imperial archives, but they were still lacking the final piece contained within BB-8. R2-D2 promptly reactivated after years of hibernation, and searched his records and found that he had previously downloaded this map while upon the first Death Star. Projecting the map into the room, R2 matched his map with the piece that BB-8 held. He then accompanied Rey and Chewbacca in the ''Millennium Falcon'' to Ahch-To, the planet identified as Luke's final destination, where he found the First Jedi Temple.

thumb|left|300px|Luke and R2 are reunited on the ''Millennium Falcon''
After Rey initially failed to convince Luke to help her, Luke was reunited with R2-D2 when he entered the ''Falcon'' to mourn the news that Han Solo was dead. Initially, Luke informed R2-D2 that he was resolute in his decision not to leave the planet or train Rey in the ways of the Force, but R2-D2 replayed the holographic recording of Leia asking Obi-Wan Kenobi for aid, inspiring Luke to accept Rey's request and give her at least a basic instruction in the ways and history of the Jedi. After Rey's failed attempt to redeem Kylo Ren, R2-D2 helped the ''Falcon'' track the other half of the binary signal device Rey was using to keep track of Leia's location while Rey and Chewbacca piloted the ''Falcon'' against the forces of the First Order. Once this fight was over, R2-D2 was once again reunited with his longtime friend, C-3PO.

===Resistance agent===
Later, R2-D2 spent some time at the Resistance Camp on the polluted planet of Anoat. He watched Leia Organa leave and prepare for her mission to Mon Cala.''Allegiance'' 1 R2-D2 and C-3PO were later stationed on the planet Batuu, operating undercover as two droids who were categorizing flora and fauna. On planet, the two droids were joined by a local droid repair technician in a battle against the Guavian Death Gang, convincing C-3PO to tell the technician of their true purpose on planet as Resistance agents, much to R2-D2's annoyance. From the battle, C-3PO also acquired a tibanna vial on the belief it could be useful, although R2-D2 demanded he be the one who carried it back when C-3PO dropped it. Pushing the vial forward on his front leg, R2-D2 and C-3PO then departed to meet back up with their fellow Resistance agents.''Star Wars: Tales from the Galaxy's Edge''

R2-D2 later joined the technician on a mission to destroy a First Order re-education facility, which they hoped to take out with the tibanna gas canister. However, as R2-D2 tossed the canister over to the technician, it was knocked away and destroyed by a laser activated by Lieutenant Gauge. Improvising, R2-D2 and the technician took command of the base's drill to destroy it and kill Gauge.''Star Wars: Tales from the Galaxy's Edge – Last Call''

===Ending the war===

Following a broadcast that implied Darth Sidious had returned to life, R2-D2 accompanied Chewbacca, Finn, Poe Dameron, and Klaud on the ''Millennium Falcon'' to meet an informant for the Resistance, Boolio, who gave them a message in the form of a data encoder intended for Organa. Finn proceeded to insert the message into R2-D2 before heading out. After returning from Sinta, R2-D2 was present in the Resistance base on Ajan Kloss, where the Resistance decoded the intelligence to discover that Sidious had indeed returned. The message revealed the Emperor was hiding on the Sith world of Exegol, the very planet that had been at the center of Calrissian and Skywalker's unfinished quest from years earlier. R2-D2 quickly searched through star charts, determining the world was still hidden from the galaxy and informing his allies of its legendary status as a hidden Sith planet.

thumb|left|300px|R2-D2 was Dameron's astromech droid during the Battle of Exegol.
As Rey and others traveled to Pasaana to search for a Sith wayfinder, R2-D2 stayed behind. Before departing, C-3PO told R2-D2 that he had been a good friend. R2 accompanied Leia's side before she made a final attempt to reach her son, Ben, through the Force. R2-D2 was saddened witnessing Leia's dying moments shortly after. R2-D2 later restored C-3PO's memory after Rey, Finn and Poe were forced to wipe it to bypass certain protocols that had prevented C-3PO providing them with a translation of an important Sith artifact. R2-D2 later accompanied Poe in his X-wing for the assault on Exegol, and the astromech later joined the others in celebration after the defeat of Sidious and the Sith Eternal.

==Characteristics==
===A loyal droid===

thumb|200px|R2 playing host to several porgs
R2-D2 was known for his loyal, courageous, and assertive personality. Over the years, R2-D2 had served several masters diligently including the Royal House of Naboo, Senator Padmé Amidala, the Jedi Knight Anakin Skywalker, Senator Bail Organa, and Anakin's son, Luke Skywalker. While R2-D2 was not designed for combat, R2-D2 was still able to hold his own in a fight on several occasions during the Clone Wars and the Galactic Civil War. Unlike his fastidious and worry-prone protocol counterpart C-3PO, R2-D2 had an adventurous spirit and was able to cope well under challenging circumstances. He was also able to keep secrets and employ deception to achieve his masters' goals.

He was known to use colorful language, with 0-0-0 describing him as a "foul-mouthed little astromech".''Star Wars'' (2015) 13 When R2 and C-3P0 were hiding from Imperial forces in Mos Eisley, C-3PO told him to watch his language, and when R2 was reunited with Luke Skywalker on Ahch-To, his former master told him to do the same, as they were on a sacred island. When Skywalker prepared to leave Dagobah to rescue Han Solo and Leia Organa, he told R2 to fire up the power converters, resulting in Obi-Wan Kenobi's ghost shooting the droid a look meant to order him not to do so. Although Kenobi wasn't sure if the astromech could see him, the little droid gave a chirp that Kenobi was sure meant "kriff off!".

R2 was programmed to be able to use forty-seven types of self-defense. Due to his resourcefulness and quick-thinking nature, R2-D2 acquitted himself well during a number of difficult and challenging missions such as repairing the Naboo Royal Starship's shield generator, preventing T-7 ion disruptor rifles from falling into the hands of the Empire, and delivering Luke's lightsaber during a mission to rescue Han Solo and Chewbacca from Jabba the Hutt.

===Relationships===
====C-3PO====
left|thumb|300x300px|R2 and 3PO during the First Order-Resistance War.
First meeting him on Tatooine during the Naboo Crisis before truly befriending him during the Battle of Geonosis, C-3PO was R2-D2's best friend and over the decades that had many adventures and misadventures together. Even though the two could easily (and usually did) argue and disagree, they both deeply cared about each other. R2 cared about 3PO so much in fact that he would normally back-up 3PO's entire memory into his own databanks within his body so he could easily restore his companion's mind and memories should anything happen to him which he did shortly before the Battle of Exegol.

====Clone Wars–era Skywalker family====
After first meeting R2 during the Naboo crisis, R2 was given to Anakin Skywalker by Padmé Amidala as a wedding present. Skywalker viewed R2 as more than a droid, considering his loyal companion a friend. Amidala also cared for R2, viewing him as a hero of Naboo and viewing him as a loyal ally who made her smile. During the Clone Wars, R2 was Skywalker's faithful co-pilot. R2's loyalty to Skywalker made him stay even after he fell to the dark side. He believed Skywalker died on Mustafar after his duel with Obi-Wan Kenobi.

====Obi-Wan Kenobi, Ahsoka Tano, and Captain Rex====

Skywalker's former master, Obi-Wan Kenobi, initially overlooked R2 as a mere droid, not understanding how Skywalker could care for the unit as much as he did. Nevertheless, Kenobi eventually took a liking to R2, though he pretended not to recognize the droid when they reunited on Tatooine during the Jedi Master's later life. However, during the journey to Alderaan aboard the ''Millennium Falcon'', Kenobi told R2 he was happy to fly with him again, going as far as to call R2 his old friend. Their reunion was short-lived, however, as Kenobi was killed a short time later aboard the Death Star at the hands of Darth Vader.

thumb|250px|R2-D2 developed a friendship with Ahsoka Tano.
R2-D2 and Skywalker's Jedi Padawan Ahsoka Tano also had a mutual liking and respect for each other. After Tano left the Jedi Order, R2 missed her, so&mdash;when she returned to Skywalker's flagship to plan for the Siege of Mandalore&mdash;R2 excitedly approached her, causing her to pet him on his dome. During the Imperial Era, Tano missed R2-D2 and his help while she was hiding on Raada, but they reunited when Senator Organa located her, resulting in a happy reunion. Organa once joked that R2-D2 was far too independent for an astromech droid but did not give him a memory wipe out of respect. Tano quipped that R2-D2 had several "bad role models" including Anakin Skywalker and Senator Amidala. Later, R2-D2 repaired Tano's freighter.

Clone Captain Rex had been Skywalker's first in command during the Clone Wars and often worked with R2 during the conflict. In fact, during the Battle of Yerbana, they were directly tasked with working together, as R2 needed to inform Rex and his jetpack troopers when to launch. Much later, during the Galactic Civil War, Rex and R2 were both part of Han Solo's strike team on Endor, which delighted R2.

====Leia Organa====

thumb|250px|Leia Organa entrusts the future of the Rebel Alliance to R2-D2.|left
R2-D2 was loyal to his master Princess Leia Organa and was determined to get her message to Obi-Wan Kenobi during the Death Star crisis, despite the odds stacked against him. R2-D2 showed ingenuity when he helped Princess Leia and Evaan Verlaine defeat a platoon of stormtroopers on Sullust by luring a pack of rockrenders to attack them. R2-D2 also showed initiative when he beamed Princess Leia's message to Chief Beon Beonel, helping repair the breach between the Alderaanians and the Alder-Espirions and save the Alderaan Flotilla from destruction at the hands of an Imperial Star Destroyer. Han Solo also respected R2-D2's skills, despite his personal dislike of most other droids.

====Luke Skywalker====

R2 also developed a friendship with Luke Skywalker, rarely leaving the young man's side after the Battle of Yavin. Skywalker was particularly happy that R2-D2 was a droid with an independent mind and personality. The astromech was present when he tried to rebuild the Jedi Order. During the quest for Exegol, when Lando Calrissian made note of how surpised he was at R2's indepdence, Skywalker could not resist bringing a smile to his face as he noted that he liked that about R2. R2 was overjoyed to reunite with him on Ahch-To.

====R5-D4====

R2-D2's determination to deliver the Death Star plans to the Alliance once led him to attempt to sabotage R5-D4 in an attempt to improve his chances of being sold. However, R2-D2 relented upon learning about R5-D4's sad story. Instead, R2-D2 managed to convince R5-D4 to help him get sold by telling him that the fate of the galaxy depended on it and that he was working for the Rebellion. This moved R5-D4, who once worked for the Rebellion.

==Equipment==
===An R2 series droid===
thumb|right|220px|R2-D2 was equipped with rocket boosters in his legs.

R2-D2 was a diminutive droid, standing 1.08 meters tall. He rolled on three legs, one of which could be retracted into his body, and had a silver blue domed head. Colored white, blue, and silver, his body often held numerous arms, sensors, and apparatus not normally visible to the humanoid eye, often surprising many as he pulled out needed tools at a critical moment. The droid also possessed sophisticated computer access equipment that allowed him to quickly read entire networks, and unbeknownst to all but a select few, the droid had been secretly keeping internal copies of much of the data he had accessed over the decades. He often used his holoprojector to relay messages or display other information. As with other astromech droids, R2-D2 spoke in the droid language of Binary.

===Accessories===

thumb|left|200px|R2-D2's many accessories
The droid featured two power-bus cables on both his legs, connecting to small power cells found under his body, positioned vertically. The droid's motorized all-terrain treads were, as a result, not impacted by ankle articulator servomotors immediately above. Activating couplers were located immediately beneath shoulder articulation joints at the "top" of the droid's legs, with the joints appearing as concentric circles. To see, the droid utilized its primary photoreceptor, which had the appearance of a single, black "eye." Acoustic signalers were located in two square-looking depressions in the droid's front, right beneath several parallel blue "lines," which were actually the openings for some of his various gadgets.

Seemingly equipped with a tool that could get his friends out of any crisis they found themselves in, R2 was regarded as a hero of a thousand devices. The droid also featured rocket boosters that could propel him into the air. However, by the time of the Galactic Civil War they had not worked in ages, with their warranty being long expired,''Return of the Jedi: Beware the Power of the Dark Side!'' having been damaged at some point after the Clone Wars.''The Star Wars Book'' Despite this fact, R2-D2 was briefly able to get them working again while visiting Endor during the First Order-Resistance war.''R2-D2 is LOST!''

*Rocket booster
*Holoprojector / Recorder
*Periscope
*Fire extinguisher
*Hidden lightsaber compartment with ejector
*Small buzz saw
*Scomp link

*Electro-shock prod (electric shock)
*Data probe
*Fusioncutter
*Utility arm
*Life-form scanner
*Motorized, all-terrain treads

==Interactive Map==

==Behind the scenes==
===Creation and portrayal===
George Lucas has stated one of his inspirations for ''Star Wars'' is ''The Hidden Fortress'', a 1958 film directed by Akira Kurosawa. The roots of C-3PO and R2-D2 came from the film, as it features two peasant characters, Tahei and Matashichi, finding themselves on a grand diplomatic adventure, becoming the narrators of the story while they travel with a general and a princess.The Characters of ''Star Wars'' - Star Wars Trilogy (DVD)

The key human performer for R2-D2 was Kenny Baker, who appeared as the astromech in ''A New Hope'', ''The Empire Strikes Back'', ''Return of the Jedi'', ''The Phantom Menace'', and ''Attack of the Clones''. For ''Revenge of the Sith'', C-3PO actor Anthony Daniels has stated that Baker did not film any scenes; Baker himself said that he may have appeared as R2-D2 in a majority of scenes that were caught during production of ''Episode II''.

Baker was credited as a consultant on ''The Force Awakens'', and Jimmy Vee took over for Episodes VIII and ''Star Wars'': Episode IX ''The Rise of Skywalker''''.'' According to the film's end credits, R2-D2 was operated in ''The Rise of Skywalker'' by small performer Hassan Taj and droid builder Lee Towersey.

In ''The Book of Boba Fett'', R2-D2 was operated by actress Christine Galey, making her the first female performer to do so.

===Design===

The droid's distinctive beeps and whistles were originally created in 1975-1977 by ''Star Wars'' sound designer Ben Burtt. Over the course of ten ''Star Wars'' live-action films, R2-D2 has been portrayed by a mix of costume shells "worn" by a small human performer, by remote-controlled mechanical props, by empty shells puppeteered externally, and by computer graphics.''The Making of Star Wars: The Definitive Story Behind the Original Film''The 3DSF.info Astro-droid Pages: Designing R2-D2.

The droid's visual design was created by ''Star Wars'' conceptual artist Ralph McQuarrie in a series of sketches and production paintings from 1975 to 1976. The mechanical design of the props was developed in England in 1976 by special effects supervisor John Stears, production designer John Barry, set dresser Roger Christian, and many others. Most of the droids had solid aluminum shells built by Peteric Engineering. The team on ''A New Hope'' had a difficult time working with the R2-D2 prop, with such difficulties persisting for years to come.

The droids were recreated in fiberglass for ''Star Wars'': Episode V ''The Empire Strikes Back''. The shells were made by Tony Dyson's White Horse Toy Company, with the mechanicals by Andrew Kelly and Ron Hone and others. The rebuild was supervised by Brian Johnson.

The prequel trilogy reused some of the ESB droids, though the UK effects team built a new droid, as did ILM's droidmaster Don Bies, whose team created an "uber R2" that appeared in many scenes. Bies also worked as the lead operator for R2-D2 in ''Star Wars'': Episode II ''Attack of the Clones'' and ''Star Wars'': Episode III ''Revenge of the Sith''. Ahead of the release of ''Attack of the Clones'', Bies and his team needed to clean Lucasfilm's stock of R2-D2 props: over years of use in films and public appearances, the props had become increasingly dirty and needed to be refurbished. Nelson Hall confirmed to ''Star Wars Insider'' that the team "didn't really" build new R2-D2 props, instead upgrading the old: such upgrades included new parts and paint, extended capabilities, and enhanced technology. Many electromechanical changes were handled by Grant Imahara, while Nelson Hall focused on R2-D2's physical appearance.

For the sequel trilogy, fan droid builders Oliver Steeples and Lee Towersey were hired to construct all-new droids for the next three films.

===''The Clone Wars''===
R2-D2 also appeared as an animated character in the ''Star Wars: The Clone Wars'' film and TV series. During the development of ''The Clone Wars'', it was planned for Alpha-17 from the ''Star Wars: Republic'' comic series to the series' main clone trooper character. However, George Lucas objected, as another name starting with "a" caused alliteration between him and other main characters Anakin Skywalker, Ahsoka Tano, and Artoo.''The Art of Star Wars: The Clone Wars''''Star Wars: The Clone Wars'' film DVD commentary Lucas ultimately provided the name "Rex,"''Star Wars: The Clone Wars – The Official Episode Guide: Season 1'' allowing the new character of Clone Captain Rex to be the main clone character.

Before the cancellation of ''The Clone Wars'' series, Brent Friedman wrote scripts for a four-episode arc starring R2-D2 and Rex. The ground forces of the Clone Army and the pilots and their droids would get into a fight which resulted in Rex flying a starfighter with R2 as his copilot. They would crash and be stranded together on one of the moons of Ryloth, where most of the episodes would take place. Rex and R2 reprogrammed a B2 super battle droid that they would grow attached to, and at some point Rex was injured.

==Appearances==

===Non-canon appearances===

==Sources==

===Non-canon sources===
*''LEGO Star Wars: Choose Your Side: Doodle Activity Book''
*
*''LEGO Star Wars'' 57
*
*LEGO Kids Memory Game
*
*
*
*''The Art of Star Wars: Visions''
*''LEGO Star Wars Character Encyclopedia Updated Edition''
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

==Notes and references==

==External links==
*
*
*

Category:Bright Tree tribe honorary members
Category:Droids of the Alliance to Restore the Republic
Category:Droids of the Galactic Empire
Category:Droids of the Galactic Republic
Category:Droids of the Hutt Clan
Category:Droids of the Jedi Order
Category:Droids of the New Republic
Category:Droids of the Resistance
Category:Droids with he/him pronouns
Category:Droids with masculine programming
Category:Endor strike team personnel
Category:Exegol air team personnel
Category:Members of D-Squad
Category:Members of the 501st Legion (Galactic Republic)
Category:Naboo residents
Category:Nebit's tribe droids
Category:Ossus residents
Category:R2-series astromech droids
Category:Red Squadron personnel
Category:Rogue Squadron personnel
Category:Royal Naboo Security Forces personnel
Category:Shadow Squadron personnel