
thumb|right|250px|The Empire used a number of types of Star Destroyers.
A '''Star Destroyer''' was a dagger-shaped type of capital ship that were used by the Galactic Republic, the Galactic Empire, the First Order, and the Sith Eternal. Notable examples of Star Destroyers include the ''Imperial''-class Star Destroyer and its predecessor, the ''Venator''-class Star Destroyer.

==Characteristics==
===Design===

According to Everi Chalis, Star Destroyers were the most resource-intensive ships the galaxy had ever seen, and only Kuat possessed shipyards that were capable of supporting and maintaining more than a handful at a time.''Battlefront: Twilight Company''

===Classes===
====Star Dreadnoughts====
thumb|left|275px|The ''Executor''-class Star Dreadnought.
The ''Executor''-class Star Dreadnought,''Ultimate Star Wars'' also known as the ''Super''-class Star Destroyer,''Star Wars: The Visual Encyclopedia'' was the largest model of Star Destroyer ever built by the Galactic Empire. It was usually referred to as a Super Star Destroyer, and consisted of the sub-models ''Executor I''-class and ''Executor II''-class. 19,000 meters long, it was used as a command ship and had over 5,000 turbolasers and ion cannons.''Star Wars Encyclopedia of Starfighters and Other Vehicles''

The ''Mega''-class Star Dreadnought, also referred to as the ''Mega''-class Star Destroyer, was the capital of the First Order and its Supreme Leader. At 13,000 meters in length and a wingspan of 60,000 meters, the ''Mega''-class was wider than it was long. The sole example of the model, the ''Supremacy'', was used by Supreme Leader Snoke and the First Order Navy to attack the Resistance.''Star Wars: The Last Jedi: Incredible Cross-Sections''

====Battlecruisers====
There were multiple examples of Star Destroyers that were classified as battlecruisers during galactic history. The ''Maelstrom''-class battle cruiser, used by the Galactic Republic during the Clone Wars, was primarily mothballed by the Galactic Empire, and at least one example, the ''Simoom'', was used by the Alliance to Restore the Republic. The ''Maelstrom''-class was considered to be a proto-Star Destroyer, and was armed with assault concussion missile launchers, heavy cannons, and other weaponry. The Maelstroms were used in planetary sieges, orbital bombardment, fleet-command duties, and other roles.''Lead by Example''

thumb|right|250px|A ''Resurgent''-class Star Destroyer of the First Order
The ''Secutor''-class Star Destroyer, also identified as the ''Secutor''-class battlecarrier, was another example of a battlecruiser in the Star Destroyer design family. A little more than 2 kilometers in length, the Secutor was used as a carrier and command ship by the Galactic Empire. It was possibly the largest starfighter dedicated vessel in the Imperial Navy.''Starships and Speeders'' The Empire's successor state, the First Order, widely deployed the ''Resurgent''-class Star Destroyer (alternatively designated as the ''Resurgent''-class Battlecruiser) during the Cold War and the First Order-Resistance War. The Resurgent was a 2,915 meter-long warship that featured advanced weaponry and systems.''Star Wars: The Force Awakens: Incredible Cross-Sections''

According to the Anaxes War College System, the Sith Eternal's ''Xyston''-class Star Destroyer, at 2,406 meters, was a battlecruiser.''Star Wars: Battles that Changed the Galaxy'' establishes that warships between 2,000 meters and 5,000 meters long were battlecruisers. Since the ''Xyston''-class Star Destroyer was 2,406 meters in length according to ''Star Wars: The Rise of Skywalker: The Visual Dictionary'', then it must be classified as a battlecruiser in the system. The Xyston was a model of Star Destroyer that was based on an upscaled ''Imperial I''-class design. The ''Xyston''-class possessed heavy weaponry, including the axial superlaser cannon which had the capability of destroying entire planets.''Star Wars: The Rise of Skywalker: The Visual Dictionary''

====Cruisers====
The Republic's ''Acclamator''-class assault ship was a 752 meter-long cruiser that was considered to be a proto-Star Destroyer. Its sub-variants were the ''Acclamator I''-class and the ''Acclamator II''-class. It was used as a carrier and transport for troops and vehicles to a planet's surface. The ''Venator''-class Star Destroyer, a class of cruiser''Rise of the Separatists'' 1,137 meters in length''Star Wars: Absolutely Everything You Need to Know'', was also referred to as the Republic Attack Cruiser or Jedi cruiser and was considered a proto-Star Destroyer. It consisted of two sub-variants, the ''Venator I''-class and the ''Venator II''-class, and was extensively used by the Galactic Republic during the Clone Wars and by the early Galactic Empire.

thumb|left|250px|The ''Imperial I''-class Star Destroyer was a model of cruiser.
The successor of the ''Venator''-class, the 1,600 meter-long ''Imperial''-class Star Destroyer, was also classified as a cruiser.''The Odyssey of Star Wars: An Epic Poem'' The ''Imperial''-class consisted of the sub-variants ''Imperial I''-class, ''Imperial II''-class, and the ''Interdictor''-class. The ''Imperial''-class became symbols of the Empire's New Order. The ''Interdictor''-class heavy cruiser was a class of heavy cruiser that was also part of the Star Destroyer family of ships used by the Empire.''Star Wars: Absolutely Everything You Need to Know, Updated and Expanded'' It was 1,129 meters long and was equipped with four gravity well projectors to serve in its capacity as an Interdictor vessel. The ''Onager''-class Star Destroyer was also classified as a cruiser class, and was equipped with a superweapon that could destroy targets on the surface of a planet or entire fleets.

Another cruiser, in accordance with the Anaxes War College System, the ''Gladiator''-class Star Destroyer was the smallest Star Destroyer in the Empire's arsenal at 600 meters in length.''Star Wars: Battles that Changed the Galaxy'' establishes that warships between 400 and 600 meters long were cruisers. Since the ''Gladiator''-class Star Destroyer was 600 meters in length according to ''Starships and Speeders'', then it must be classified as a cruiser in the system. Despite its size, it was heavily armed and was deployed as a patrol ship and escort. It could serve in the capacity of a flagship for a small task force''Friends Like These'' or battle group.''Nexus of Power'' The ''Gladiator I'' was a sub-variant of the ship.

====Other examples====
thumb|right|280px|A ''Victory II''-class Star Destroyer utilized by the Galactic Empire
There were other examples of Star Destroyers that were in service alongside the cruisers, dreadnoughts, and battlecruisers. The ''Imperator''-class Star Destroyer was a large, powerful, and multi-functional warship used by the Republic. The ''Imperator''-class saw limited action, and were soon succeeded by the ''Imperial''-class. The Empire's qaz-class Star Destroyer, armed with multiple batteries, was used by the Empire.''Catalyst: A Rogue One Novel'' The ''Tector''-class was another example that saw service in the Imperial Navy.

The ''Victory I''-class Star Destroyer, deployed by the Republic and subsequent Empire, was another example of the Star Destroyer design. Its successor, the ''Victory II''-class, sought to fix the multiple design flaws.

==History==

thumb|left|250px|A trio of ''Venator''-class Star Destroyers
During the Clone Wars, the Galactic Republic Navy fielded a fleet of ''Venator''-class Star Destroyers. The ''Venator''-class saw action in numerous battles against the Confederacy navy including the Battle of Coruscant. Following the transformation of the Republic into the Galactic Empire, the Republic's Star Destroyers were incorporated into the new Imperial Navy. Aside from the ''Venator'' and ''Imperial''-class Star Destroyers, other known models in Imperial service included the ''Victory'' and ''Secutor''-class Star Destroyers.''Tarkin''  The Imperial Navy contained thousands and thousands of Star Destroyers - each one capable of glassing an entire planet - making it history's mightiest starfleet.

During the rebellion and the Galactic Civil War, Imperial Star Destroyers took part in numerous engagements against the various rebel forces that eventually coalesced into the Alliance to Restore the Republic.''Rogue One: A Star Wars Story'' Star Destroyers were deployed during the secret mission to Tatooine, Battle of Hoth, and the Battle of Endor.

thumb|right|300px|The Imperial Star Destroyer
Following the events at Endor, the Rebel Alliance's successor government, the New Republic, captured and destroyed numerous Star Destroyers in several engagements including the Battle of Theed,''Shattered Empire'' 3 the Rebellion on Akiva,''Aftermath'' the Defense of Kuat, and the Liberation of Kashyyyk.''Aftermath: Life Debt'' By 5 ABY,''Star Wars: Timelines'' dates the events of ''Aftermath: Life Debt'' to 5 ABY. Grand Admiral Rae Sloane estimated that 75% of the Imperial Star Destroyers before Endor had either been destroyed, captured, or lost in "confirmable if curious ways." While trawling through the archives at the Hall of Imperial Register on Coruscant, Sloane discovered that the remaining 25% had mysteriously disappeared and their purported destruction had been falsified.

Later, Sloane learned that Fleet Admiral Gallius Rax secretly commanded Imperial fleets in the Almagest, the Recluse's Nebula, the Queluhan Nebula, the Ro-Loo Triangle, and the Inamorata. These fleets consisted of hundreds of Star Destroyers and thousands of smaller ships. Following the Attack on Chandrila, Rax ordered the Imperial fleets to assemble above the planet Jakku. Numerous Star Destroyers, including Captain Ciena Ree's starship ''Inflictor'', saw action during the Battle of Jakku, the cataclysmic battle that ended the Galactic Civil War in favor of the New Republic.''Lost Stars''

thumb|left|250px|The ''Mega''-class Star Dreadnought ''Supremacy'' and its escorts.
Thirty years after the Battle of Endor, the barren surface of Jakku was still littered with the wreckage of countless Star Destroyers. These derelict starships were regularly targeted by scavengers such as Rey. The First Order, a remnant of the Old Empire, was also known to utilize Star Destroyers as part of its fleet,''Before the Awakening'' such as the First Order's ''Resurgent''-class Star Destroyers, which were inspired by the dagger-shaped design of the Old Empire's vessels.''Star Wars: The Force Awakens: The Visual Dictionary'' The First Order's leadership, including its Supreme Leader, were stationed aboard the gargantuan ''Mega''-class Star Dreadnought ''Supremacy'', the sole ship of its class.''Star Wars Droids App by Sphero''

thumb|right|250px|The ''Xyston''-class Star Destroyer utilized by the Sith Eternal.
When the revived Darth Sidious and his Sith Eternal cultists emerged from Exegol and assimilated the First Order's military after the death of Supreme Leader Snoke, the Sith Lord unveiled his own armada, the Final Order, which was comprised of 1,080 ''Xyston''-class Star Destroyers. The entire fleet was destroyed in the Battle of Exegol before they could be deployed en masse.

==Appearances==

===Non-canon appearances===

==Sources==

===Non-canon sources===
*''LEGO Star Wars: Build Your Own Adventure: Galactic Missions''
*
*
*''The Art of Star Wars: Visions''
*

==Notes and references==

==External links==
*

Category:Capital ship classifications